The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended
by Isaac Newton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended
       To which is Prefix'd, A Short Chronicle from the First
       Memory of Things in Europe, to the Conquest of Persia by
       Alexander the Great

Author: Isaac Newton

Release Date: May 7, 2005 [EBook #15784]

Language: English

Character set encoding: Unicode UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHRONOLOGY OF ANCIENT ***




Produced by Robert Shimmin, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.




THE
CHRONOLOGY
OF
ANCIENT KINGDOMS
AMENDED.

To which is Prefix'd,
_A _SHORT CHRONICLE_ from the First
Memory of Things in _Europe_, to the Conquest
of _Persia_ by _Alexander_ the Great._

       *       *       *       *       *

By Sir _ISAAC NEWTON_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_LONDON_:

Printed for J. TONSON in the _Strand_, and J. OSBORN
and T. LONGMAN in _Pater-noster Row_.

MDCCXXVIII.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THE

QUEEN.

MADAM,

_As I could never hope to write any thing my self, worthy to be laid before
YOUR MAJESTY; I think it a very great happiness, that it should be my lot
to usher into the world, under Your Sacred Name, the last work of as great
a Genius as any Age ever produced: an Offering of such value in its self,
as to be in no danger of suffering from the meanness of the hand that
presents it._

_The impartial and universal encouragement which YOUR MAJESTY has always
given to Arts and Sciences, entitles You to the best returns the learned
world is able to make: And the many extraordinary Honours YOUR MAJESTY
vouchsafed the Author of the following sheets, give You a just right to his
Productions. These, above the rest, lay the most particular claim to Your
Royal Protection; For the _Chronology_ had never appeared in its present
Form without YOUR MAJESTY's Influence; and the _Short Chronicle_, which
precedes it, is entirely owing to the Commands with which You were pleased
to honour him, out of your singular Care for the education of the Royal
Issue, and earnest desire to form their minds betimes, and lead them early
into the knowledge of Truth._

_The Author has himself acquainted the Publick, that the following Treatise
was the fruit of his vacant hours, and the relief he sometimes had recourse
to, when tired with his other studies. What an Idea does it raise of His
abilities, to find that a Work of such labour and learning, as would have
been a sufficient employment and glory for the whole life of another, was
to him diversion only, and amusement! The Subject is in its nature
incapable of that demonstration upon which his other writings are founded,
but his usual accuracy and judiciousness are here no less observable; And
at the same time that he supports his suggestions, with all the authorities
and proofs that the whole compass of Science can furnish, he offers them
with the greatest caution; And by a Modesty, that was natural to Him and
always accompanies such superior talents, sets a becoming example to
others, not to be too presumptuous in matters so remote and dark. Tho' the
Subject be only _Chronology_, yet, as the mind of the Author abounded with
the most extensive variety of Knowledge, he frequently intersperses
Observations of a different kind; and occasionally instills principles of
Virtue and Humanity, which seem to have been always uppermost in his heart,
and, as they were the Constant Rule of his actions, appear Remarkably in
all his writings._

_Here YOUR MAJESTY will see _Astronomy_, and a just Observation on the
course of Nature, assisting other parts of Learning to illustrate
Antiquity; and a Penetration and Sagacity peculiar to the great Author,
dispelling that Mist, with which Fable and Error had darkened it; and will
with pleasure contemplate the first dawnings of Your favourite Arts and
Sciences, the noblest and most beneficial of which He alone carried farther
in a few years, than all the most Learned who went before him, had been
able to do in many Ages. Here too, MADAM, You will observe, that an
Abhorrence of Idolatry and Persecution (the very essence and foundation of
that Religion, which makes so bright a part of YOUR MAJESTY's character)
was one of the _earliest Laws_ of the Divine Legislator, the _Morality of
the first Ages, and the primitive Religion of both Jews and Christians_;
and, as the Author adds, _ought to be the standing Religion of all Nations;
it being for the honour of God, and good of Mankind_. Nor will YOUR MAJESTY
be displeased to find his sentiments so agreeable to Your own, whilst he
condemns _all oppression_; and every kind of _cruelty, even to brute
beasts_; and, with so much warmth, inculcates _Mercy_, _Charity_, and the
indispensable duty of _doing good_, and promoting the general _welfare of
mankind_: Those great ends, for which Government was first instituted, and
to which alone it is administred in this happy Nation, under a KING, who
distinguished himself early in opposition to the Tyranny which threatned
_Europe_, and chuses to reign in the hearts of his subjects; Who, by his
innate Benevolence, and Paternal Affection to his People, establishes and
confirms all their Liberties; and, by his Valour and Magnanimity, guards
and defends them._

_That Sincerity and Openness of mind, which is the darling quality of this
Nation, is become more conspicuous, by being placed upon the Throne; And we
see, with Pride, OUR SOVEREIGN the most eminent for a Virtue, by which our
country is so desirous to be distinguished. A Prince, whose views and heart
are above all the mean arts of Disguise, is far out of the reach of any
temptation to Introduce Blindness and Ignorance. And, as HIS MAJESTY is, by
his incessant personal cares, dispensing Happiness at home, and Peace
abroad; You, MADAM, lead us on by Your great Example to the most noble use
of that Quiet and Ease, which we enjoy under His Administration, whilst all
Your hours of leisure are employed in cultivating in Your Self That
Learning, which You so warmly patronize in Others._

_YOUR MAJESTY does not think the instructive Pursuit, an entertainment
below Your exalted Station; and are Your Self a proof, that the abstruser
parts of it are not beyond the reach of Your Sex. Nor does this Study end
in barren speculation; It discovers itself in a steady attachment to true
Religion; in Liberality, Beneficence, and all those amiable Virtues, which
increase and heighten the Felicities of a Throne, at the same time that
they bless All around it. Thus, MADAM, to enjoy, together with the highest
state of publick Splendor and Dignity all the retired Pleasures and
domestick Blessings of private life; is the perfection of human Wisdom, as
well as Happiness._

_The good Effects of this Love of knowledge, will not stop with the present
Age; It will diffuse its Influence with advantage to late Posterity: And
what may we not anticipate in our minds for the Generations to come under a
Royal Progeny, so descended, so educated, and formed by such Patterns!_

_The glorious Prospect gives us abundant reason to hope, that Liberty and
Learning will be perpetuated together; and that the bright Examples of
Virtue and Wisdom, set in this Reign by the Royal Patrons of Both, will be
transmitted with the Scepter to their Posterity, till this and the other
Works of Sir ISAAC NEWTON shall be forgot, and Time it self be no more:
Which is the most sincere and ardent wish of_

_MADAM,_

May it please YOUR MAJESTY,

YOUR MAJESTY's most obedient and most dutiful subject and servant,

_John Conduitt_.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CONTENTS.

_A Short Chronicle from the first Memory of Things in         page 1
_Europe_, to the Conquest of _Persia_ by _Alexander_ the
Great._

The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms amended.

Chap. I. _Of the Chronology of the First Ages of the_         p. 43
Greeks_._

Chap. II. _Of the Empire of_ Egypt_._                         p. 191

Chap. III. _Of the_ Assyrian _Empire._                        p. 265

Chap. IV. _Of the two Contemporary Empires of the             p. 294
_Babylonians_ and _Medes_._

Chap. V. _A Description of the Temple of _Solomon_._          p. 332

Chap. VI. _Of the Empire of the _Persians_._                  p. 347

       *       *       *       *       *

Advertisement.

_Tho' _The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms amended_, was writ by the Author
many years since; yet he lately revis'd it, and was actually preparing it
for the Press at the time of his death. But _The Short Chronicle_ was never
intended to be made public, and therefore was not so lately corrected by
him. To this the Reader must impute it, if he shall find any places where
_the Short Chronicle_ does not accurately agree with the Dates assigned in
the larger Piece. The Sixth Chapter was not copied out with the other Five,
which makes it doubtful whether he intended to print it: but being found
among his Papers, and evidently appearing to be a Continuation of the same
Work, and (as such) abridg'd in _the Short Chronicle_; it was thought
proper to be added._

_Had the _Great Author_ himself liv'd to publish this Work, there would
have been no occasion for this Advertisement; But as it is, the Reader is
desired to allow for such imperfections as are inseparable from Posthumous
Pieces; and, in so great a number of proper names, to excuse some errors of
the Press that have escaped._

       *       *       *       *       *

A SHORT

CHRONICLE

FROM THE
First Memory of Things in _Europe_,
TO THE
Conquest of _Persia_ by _Alexander_ the Great.

       *       *       *       *       *

The INTRODUCTION.

The _Greek_ Antiquities are full of Poetical Fictions, because the _Greeks_
wrote nothing in Prose, before the Conquest of _Asia_ by _Cyrus_ the
_Persian_. Then _Pherecydes Scyrius_ and _Cadmus Milesius_ introduced the
writing in Prose. _Pherecydes Atheniensis_, about the end of the Reign of
_Darius Hystaspis_, wrote of Antiquities, and digested his work by
Genealogies, and was reckoned one of the best Genealogers. _Epimenides_ the
Historian proceeded also by Genealogies; and _Hellanicus_, who was twelve
years older than _Herodotus_, digested his History by the Ages or
Successions of the Priestesses of _Juno Argiva_. Others digested theirs by
the Kings of the _Lacedæmonians_, or Archons of _Athens_. _Hippias_ the
_Elean_, about thirty years before the fall of the _Persian_ Empire,
published a breviary or list of the Olympic Victors; and about ten years
before the fall thereof, _Ephorus_ the disciple of _Isocrates_ formed a
Chronological History of _Greece_, beginning with the return of the
_Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_, and ending with the siege of _Perinthus_,
in the twentieth year of _Philip_ the father of _Alexander_ the great: But
he digested things by Generations, and the reckoning by Olympiads was not
yet in use, nor doth it appear that the Reigns of Kings were yet set down
by numbers of years. The _Arundelian_ marbles were composed sixty years
after the death of _Alexander_ the great (_An._ 4. _Olymp._ 128.) and yet
mention not the Olympiads: But in the next Olympiad, _Timæus Siculus_
published an history in several books down to his own times, according to
the Olympiads, comparing the Ephori, the Kings of _Sparta_, the Archons of
_Athens_, and the Priestesses of _Argos_, with the Olympic Victors, so as
to make the Olympiads, and the Genealogies and Successions of Kings,
Archons, and Priestesses, and poetical histories suit with one another,
according to the best of his judgment. And where he left off, _Polybius_
began and carried on the history.

So then a little after the death of _Alexander_ the great, they began to
set down the Generations, Reigns and Successions, in numbers of years, and
by putting Reigns and Successions equipollent to Generations, and three
Generations to an hundred or an hundred and twenty years (as appears by
their Chronology) they have made the Antiquities of _Greece_ three or four
hundred years older than the truth. And this was the original of the
Technical Chronology of the _Greeks_. _Eratosthenes_ wrote about an hundred
years after the death of _Alexander_ the great: He was followed by
_Apollodorus_, and these two have been followed ever since by Chronologers.

But how uncertain their Chronology is, and how doubtful it was reputed by
the _Greeks_ of those times, may be understood by these passages of
_Plutarch_. _Some reckon_, saith he, [1] Lycurgus _contemporary to
_Iphitus_, and to have been his companion in ordering the Olympic
festivals: amongst whom was _Aristotle_ the Philosopher, arguing from the
Olympic Disc, which had the name of _Lycurgus_ upon it. Others supputing
the times by the succession of the Kings of the _Lacedæmonians_, as
_Eratosthenes_ and _Apollodorus_, affirm that he was not a few years older
than the first Olympiad._ First _Aristotle_ and some others made him as old
as the first Olympiad; then _Eratosthenes_, _Apollodorus_, and some others
made him above an hundred years older: and in another place _Plutarch_ [2]
tells us: _The congress of _Solon_ with _Croesus_, some think they can
confute by Chronology. But an history so illustrious, and verified by so
many witnesses, and (which is more) so agreeable to the manners of _Solon_,
and so worthy of the greatness of his mind and of his wisdom, I cannot
persuade my self to reject because of some Chronological Canons, as they
call them: which hundreds of authors correcting, have not yet been able to
constitute any thing certain, in which they could agree among themselves,
about repugnancies_. It seems the Chronologers had made the Legislature of
_Solon_ too ancient to consist with that Congress.

For reconciling such repugnancies, Chronologers have sometimes doubled the
persons of men. So when the Poets had changed _Io_ the daughter of
_Inachus_ into the _Egyptian Isis_, Chronologers made her husband _Osiris_
or _Bacchus_ and his mistress _Ariadne_ as old as _Io_, and so feigned that
there were two _Ariadnes_, one the mistress of _Bacchus_, and the other the
mistress of _Theseus_, and two _Minos's_ their fathers, and a younger _Io_
the daughter of _Jasus_, writing _Jasus_ corruptly for _Inachus_. And so
they have made two _Pandions_, and two _Erechtheus's_, giving the name of
_Erechthonius_ to the first; _Homer_ calls the first, _Erechtheus_: and by
such corruptions they have exceedingly perplexed Ancient History.

And as for the Chronology of the _Latines_, that is still more uncertain.
_Plutarch_ represents great uncertainties in the Originals of _Rome_: and
so doth _Servius_. The old records of the _Latines_ were burnt by the
_Gauls_, sixty and four years before the death of _Alexander_ the great;
and _Quintus Fabius Pictor_, the oldest historian of the _Latines_, lived
an hundred years later than that King.

In Sacred History, the _Assyrian_ Empire began with _Pul_ and
_Tiglathpilaser_, and lasted about 170 years. And accordingly _Herodotus_
hath made _Semiramis_ only five generations, or about 166 years older than
_Nitocris_, the mother of the last King of _Babylon_. But _Ctesias_ hath
made _Semiramis_ 1500 years older than _Nitocris_, and feigned a long
series of Kings of _Assyria_, whose names are not _Assyrian_, nor have any
affinity with the _Assyrian_ names in Scripture.

The Priests of _Egypt_ told _Herodotus_, that _Menes_ built _Memphis_ and
the sumptuous temple of _Vulcan_, in that City: and that _Rhampsinitus_,
_Mœris_, _Asychis_ and _Psammiticus_ added magnificent porticos to that
temple. And it is not likely that _Memphis_ could be famous, before
_Homer_'s days who doth not mention it, or that a temple could be above two
or three hundred years in building. The Reign of _Psammiticus_ began about
655 years before Christ, and I place the founding of this temple by _Menes_
about 257 years earlier: but the Priests of _Egypt_ had so magnified their
Antiquities before the days of _Herodotus_, as to tell him that from
_Menes_ to _Mœris_ (who reigned 200 years before _Psammiticus_) there were
330 Kings, whose Reigns took up as many Ages, that is eleven thousand
years, and had filled up the interval with feigned Kings, who had done
nothing. And before the days of _Diodorus Siculus_ they had raised their
Antiquities so much higher, as to place six, eight, or ten new Reigns of
Kings between those Kings, whom they had represented to _Herodotus_ to
succeed one another immediately.

In the Kingdom of _Sicyon_, Chronologers have split _Apis Epaphus_ or
_Epopeus_ into two Kings, whom they call _Apis_ and _Epopeus_, and between
them have inserted eleven or twelve feigned names of Kings who did nothing,
and thereby they have made its Founder _Ægialeus_, three hundred years
older than his brother _Phoroneus_. Some have made the Kings of _Germany_
as old as the Flood: and yet before the use of letters, the names and
actions of men could scarce be remembred above eighty or an hundred years
after their deaths: and therefore I admit no Chronology of things done in
_Europe_, above eighty years before _Cadmus_ brought letters into _Europe_;
none, of things done in _Germany_, before the rise of the _Roman_ Empire.

Now since _Eratosthenes_ and _Apollodorus_ computed the times by the Reigns
of the Kings of _Sparta_, and (as appears by their Chronology still
followed) have made the seventeen Reigns of these Kings in both Races,
between the Return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_ and the Battel
of _Thermopylæ_, take up _622_ years, which is after the rate of 36½ years
to a Reign, and yet a Race of seventeen Kings of that length is no where to
be met with in all true History, and Kings at a moderate reckoning Reign
but 18 or 20 years a-piece one with another: I have stated the time of the
return of the _Heraclides_ by the last way of reckoning, placing it about
340 years before the Battel of _Thermopylæ_. And making the Taking of
_Troy_ eighty years older than that Return, according to _Thucydides_, and
the _Argonautic_ Expedition a Generation older than the _Trojan_ War, and
the Wars of _Sesostris_ in _Thrace_ and death of _Ino_ the daughter of
_Cadmus_ a Generation older than that Expedition: I have drawn up the
following Chronological Table, so as to make Chronology suit with the
Course of Nature, with Astronomy, with Sacred History, with _Herodotus_ the
Father of History, and with it self; without the many repugnancies
complained of by _Plutarch_. I do not pretend to be exact to a year: there
may be Errors of five or ten years, and sometimes twenty, and not much
above.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SHORT

CHRONICLE

FROM THE
_First Memory of things in _Europe_ to
the Conquest of _Persia_ by _Alexander_
the great._

_The Times are set down in years before Christ._

The _Canaanites_ who fled from _Joshua_, retired in great numbers into
_Egypt_, and there conquered _Timaus_, _Thamus_, or _Thammuz_ King of the
lower _Egypt_, and reigned there under their Kings _Salatis_, _Bœon_,
_Apachnas_, _Apophis_, _Janias_, _Assis_, &c. untill the days of _Eli_ and
_Samuel_. They fed on flesh, and sacrificed men after the manner of the
_Phœnicians_, and were called Shepherds by the _Egyptians_, who lived only
on the fruits of the earth, and abominated flesh-eaters. The upper parts of
_Egypt_ were in those days under many Kings, Reigning at _Coptos_,
_Thebes_, _This_, _Elephantis_, and other Places, which by conquering one
another grew by degrees into one Kingdom, over which _Misphragmuthosis_
Reigned in the days of _Eli_.

In the year before Christ 1125 _Mephres_ Reigned over the upper _Egypt_
from _Syene_ to _Heliopolis_, and his Successor _Misphragmuthosis_ made a
lasting war upon the Shepherds soon after, and caused many of them to fly
into _Palestine_, _Idumæa_, _Syria_, and _Libya_; and under _Lelex_,
_Æzeus_, _Inachus_, _Pelasgus_, _Æolus_ the first, _Cecrops_, and other
Captains, into _Greece_. Before those days _Greece_ and all _Europe_ was
peopled by wandring _Cimmerians_, and _Scythians_ from the backside of the
_Euxine Sea_, who lived a rambling wild sort of life, like the _Tartars_ in
the northern parts of _Asia_. Of their Race was _Ogyges_, in whose days
these _Egyptian_ strangers came into _Greece_. The rest of the Shepherds
were shut up by _Misphragmuthosis_, in a part of the lower _Egypt_ called
_Abaris_ or _Pelusium_.

In the year 1100 the _Philistims_, strengthned by the access of the
Shepherds, conquer _Israel_, and take the Ark. _Samuel_ judges _Israel_.

1085. _Hæmon_ the son of _Pelasgus_ Reigns in _Thessaly_.

1080. _Lycaon_ the son of _Pelasgus_ builds _Lycosura_; _Phoroneus_ the son
of _Inachus_, _Phoronicum_, afterwards called _Argos_; _Ægialeus_ the
brother of _Phoroneus_ and son of _Inachus_, _Ægialeum_, afterwards called
_Sicyon_: and these were the oldest towns in _Peloponnesus_. 'Till then
they built only single houses scattered up and down in the fields. About
the same time _Cecrops_ built _Cecropia_ in _Attica_, afterwards called
_Athens_; and _Eleusine_, the son of _Ogyges_, built _Eleusis_. And these
towns gave a beginning to the Kingdoms of the _Arcadians_, _Argives_,
_Sicyons_, _Athenians_, _Eleusinians_, &c. _Deucalion_ flourishes.

1070. _Amosis_, or _Tethmosis_, the successor of _Misphragmuthosis_,
abolishes the _Phœnician_ custom in _Heliopolis_ of sacrificing men, and
drives the Shepherds out of _Abaris_. By their access the _Philistims_
become so numerous, as to bring into the field against _Saul_ 30000
chariots, 6000 horsemen, and people as the sand on the sea shore for
multitude. _Abas_, the father of _Acrisius_ and _Prœtus_, comes from
_Egypt_.

1069. _Saul_ is made King of _Israel_, and by the hand of _Jonathan_ gets a
great victory over the _Philistims_. _Eurotas_ the son of _Lelex_, and
_Lacedæmon_ who married _Sparta_ the daughter of _Eurotas_, Reign in
_Laconia_, and build _Sparta_.

1060. _Samuel_ dies.

1059. _David_ made King.

1048. The _Edomites_ are conquered and dispersed by _David_, and some of
them fly into _Egypt_ with their young King _Hadad_. Others fly to the
_Persian Gulph_ with their Commander _Oannes_; and others from the _Red
Sea_ to the coast of the _Mediterranean_, and fortify _Azoth_ against
_David_, and take _Zidon_; and the _Zidonians_ who fled from them build
_Tyre_ and _Aradus_, and make _Abibalus_ King of _Tyre_. These _Edomites_
carry to all places their Arts and Sciences; amongst which were their
Navigation, Astronomy, and Letters; for in _Idumæa_ they had Constellations
and Letters before the days of _Job_, who mentions them: and there _Moses_
learnt to write the Law in a book. These _Edomites_ who fled to the
_Mediterranean_, translating the word _Erythræa_ into that of _Phœnicia_,
give the name of _Phœnicians_ to themselves, and that of _Phœnicia_ to all
the sea-coasts of _Palestine_ from _Azoth_ to _Zidon_. And hence came the
tradition of the _Persians_, and of the _Phœnicians_ themselves, mentioned
by _Herodotus_, that the _Phœnicians_ came originally from the _Red Sea_,
and presently undertook long voyages on the _Mediterranean_.

1047. _Acrisius_ marries _Eurydice_, the daughter of _Lacedæmon_ and
_Sparta_. The _Phœnician_ mariners who fled from the _Red Sea_, being used
to long voyages for the sake of traffic, begin the like voyages on the
_Mediterranean_ from _Zidon_; and sailing as far as _Greece_, carry away
_Io_ the daughter of _Inachus_, who with other _Grecian_ women came to
their ships to buy their merchandize. The _Greek Seas_ begin to be infested
with Pyrates.

1046. The _Syrians_ of _Zobah_ and _Damascus_ are conquered by _David_.
_Nyctimus_, the son of _Lycaon_, reigns in _Arcadia_. _Deucalion_ still
alive.

1045. Many of the _Phœnicians_ and _Syrians_ fleeing from _Zidon_ and from
_David_, come under the conduct of _Cadmus_, _Cilix_, _Phœnix_,
_Membliarius_, _Nycteus_, _Thasus_, _Atymnus_, and other Captains, into
_Asia minor_, _Crete_, _Greece_, and _Libya_; and introduce Letters, Music,
Poetry, the _Octaeteris_, Metals and their Fabrication, and other Arts,
Sciences and Customs of the _Phœnicians_. At this time _Cranaus_ the
successor of _Cecrops_ Reigned in _Attica_, and in his Reign and the
beginning of the Reign of _Nyctimus_, the _Greeks_ place the flood of
_Deucalion_. This flood was succeeded by four Ages or Generations of men,
in the first of which _Chiron_ the son of _Saturn_ and _Philyra_ was born,
and the last of which according to _Hesiod_ ended with the _Trojan_ War;
and so places the Destruction of _Troy_ four Generations or about 140 years
later than that flood, and the coming of _Cadmus_, reckoning with the
ancients three Generations to an hundred years. With these _Phœnicians_
came a sort of men skilled in the Religious Mysteries, Arts, and Sciences
of _Phœnicia_, and settled in several places under the names of _Curetes_,
_Corybantes_, _Telchines_, and _Idæi Dactyli_.

1043. Hellen, the son of _Deucalion_, and father of _Æolus_, _Xuthus_, and
_Dorus_, flourishes.

1035. _Erectheus_ Reigns in _Attica_. _Æthlius_, the grandson of
_Deucalion_ and father of _Endymion_, builds _Elis_. The _Idæi Dactyli_
find out Iron in mount _Ida_ in _Crete_, and work it into armour and iron
tools, and thereby give a beginning to the trades of smiths and armourers
in _Europe_; and by singing and dancing in their armour, and keeping time
by striking upon one another's armour with their swords, they bring in
Music and Poetry; and at the same time they nurse up the _Cretan Jupiter_
in a cave of the same mountain, dancing about him in their armour.

1034. _Ammon_ Reigns in _Egypt_. He conquered _Libya_, and reduced that
people from a wandering savage life to a civil one, and taught them to lay
up the fruits of the earth; and from him _Libya_ and the desert above it
were anciently called _Ammonia_. He was the first that built long and tall
ships with sails, and had a fleet of such ships on the _Red Sea_, and
another on the _Mediterranean_ at _Irasa_ in _Libya_. 'Till then they used
small and round vessels of burden, invented on the _Red Sea_, and kept
within sight of the shore. For enabling them to cross the seas without
seeing the shore, the _Egyptians_ began in his days to observe the Stars:
and from this beginning Astronomy and Sailing had their rise. Hitherto the
Lunisolar year had been in use: but this year being of an uncertain length,
and so, unfit for Astronomy, in his days and in the days of his sons and
grandsons, by observing the Heliacal Risings and Setting of the Stars, they
found the length of the Solar year, and made it consist of five days more
than the twelve calendar months of the old Lunisolar year. _Creusa_ the
daughter of _Erechtheus_ marries _Xuthus_ the son of _Hellen_. _Erechtheus_
having first celebrated the _Panathenæa_ joins horses to a chariot.
_Ægina_, the daughter of _Asopus_, and mother of _Æacus_, born.

1030. _Ceres_ a woman of _Sicily_, in seeking her daughter who was stolen,
comes into _Attica_, and there teaches the _Greeks_ to sow corn; for which
Benefaction she was Deified after death. She first taught the Art to
_Triptolemus_ the young son of _Celeus_ King of _Eleusis_.

1028. _Oenotrus_ the youngest son of _Lycaon_, the _Janus_ of the
_Latines_, led the first Colony of _Greeks_ into _Italy_, and there taught
them to build houses. _Perseus_ born.

1020. _Arcas_, the son of _Callisto_ and grandson of _Lycaon_, and
_Eumelus_ the first King of _Achaia_, receive bread-corn from
_Triptolemus_.

1019. _Solomon_ Reigns, and marries the daughter of _Ammon_, and by means
of this affinity is supplied with horses from _Egypt_; and his merchants
also bring horses from thence for all the Kings of the _Hittites_ and
_Syrians_: for horses came originally from _Libya_; and thence _Neptune_
was called _Equestris_. _Tantalus_ King of _Phrygia_ steals _Ganimede_ the
son of _Tros_ King of _Troas_.

1017. _Solomon_ by the assistance of the _Tyrians_ and _Aradians_, who had
mariners among them acquainted with the _Red Sea_, sets out a fleet upon
that sea. Those assistants build new cities in the _Persian Gulph_, called
_Tyre_ and _Aradus_.

1015. The Temple of _Solomon_ is founded. _Minos_ Reigns in _Crete_
expelling his father _Asterius_, who flees into _Italy_, and becomes the
_Saturn_ of the _Latines_. _Ammon_ takes _Gezer_ from the _Canaanites_, and
gives it to his daughter, _Solomon's_ wife.

1014. _Ammon_ places _Cepheus_ at _Joppa_.

1010. _Sesac_ in the Reign of his father _Ammon_ invades _Arabia Fœlix_,
and sets up pillars at the mouth of the _Red Sea_. _Apis_, _Epaphus_ or
_Epopeus_, the son of _Phroroneus_, and _Nycteus_ King of _Bœotia_, slain.
_Lycus_ inherits the Kingdom of his brother _Nycteus_. _Ætolus_ the son of
_Endymion_ flies into the Country of the _Curetes_ in _Achaia_, and calls
it _Ætolia_; and of _Pronoe_ the daughter of _Phorbas_ begets _Pleuron_ and
_Calydon_, who built cities in _Ætolia_ called by their own names.
_Antiopa_ the daughter of _Nycteus_ is sent home to _Lycus_ by _Lamedon_
the successor of _Apis_, and in the way brings forth _Amphion_ and
_Zethus_.

1008. _Sesac_, in the Reign of his father _Ammon_, invades _Afric_ and
_Spain_, and sets up pillars in all his conquests, and particularly at the
mouth of the _Mediterranean_, and returns home by the coast of _Gaul_ and
_Italy_.

1007. _Ceres_ being dead _Eumolpus_ institutes her Mysteries in _Eleusine_.
The Mysteries of _Rhea_ are instituted in _Phrygia_, in the city _Cybele_.
About this time Temples begin to be built in _Greece_. _Hyagnis_ the
_Phrygian_ invents the pipe. After the example of the common-council of the
five Lords of the _Philistims_, the _Greeks_ set up the _Amphictyonic_
Council, first at _Thermopylæ_, by the influence of _Amphictyon_ the son of
_Deucalion_; and a few years after at _Delphi_ by the influence of
_Acrisius_. Among the cites, whose deputies met at _Thermopylæ_, I do not
find _Athens_, and therefore doubt whether _Amphictyon_ was King of that
city. If he was the son of _Deucalion_ and brother of _Hellen_, he and
_Cranaus_ might Reign together in several parts of _Attica_. But I meet
with a later _Amphictyon_ who entertained the great _Bacchus_. This Council
worshipped _Ceres_, and therefore was instituted after her death.

1006. _Minos_ prepares a fleet, clears the _Greek_ seas of Pyrates, and
sends Colonies to the Islands of the _Greeks_, some of which were not
inhabited before. _Cecrops_ II. Reigns in _Attica_. _Caucon_ teaches the
Mysteries of _Ceres_ in _Messene_.

1005. _Andromeda_ carried away from _Joppa_ by _Perseus_. _Pandion_ the
brother of _Cecrops_ II. Reigns in _Attica_. _Car_, the son of _Phoroneus_,
builds a Temple to _Ceres_.

1002. _Sesac_ Reigns in _Egypt_ and adorns _Thebes_, dedicating it to his
father _Ammon_ by the name of _No-Ammon_ or _Ammon-No_, that is the people
or city of _Ammon_: whence the _Greeks_ called it _Diospolis_, the city of
_Jupiter_. _Sesac_ also erected Temples and Oracles to his father in
_Thebes_, _Ammonia_, and _Ethiopia_, and thereby caused his father to be
worshipped as a God in those countries, and I think also in _Arabia Fœlix_:
and this was the original of the worship of _Jupiter Ammon_, and the first
mention of Oracles that I meet with in Prophane History. War between
_Pandion_ and _Labdacus_ the grandson of _Cadmus_.

994. _Ægeus_ Reigns in _Attica_.

993. _Pelops_ the son of _Tantalus_ comes into _Peloponnesus_, marries
_Hippodamia_ the granddaughter of _Acrisius_, takes _Ætolia_ from _Ætolus_
the son of _Endymion_, and by his riches grows potent.

990. _Amphion_ and _Zethus_ slay _Lycus_, put _Laius_ the son of _Labdacus_
to flight, and Reign in _Thebes_, and wall the city about.

989. _Dædalus_ and his nephew _Talus_ invent the saw, the turning-lath, the
wimble, the chip-ax, and other instruments of Carpenters and Joyners, and
thereby give a beginning to those Arts in _Europe_. _Dædalus_ also invented
the making of Statues with their feet asunder, as if they walked.

988. _Minos_ makes war upon the _Athenians_, for killing his son
_Androgeus_. _Æacus_ flourishes.

987. _Dædalus_ kills his nephew _Talus_, and flies to _Minos_. A Priestess
of _Jupiter Ammon_, being brought by _Phœnician_ merchants into _Greece_,
sets up the Oracle of _Jupiter_ at _Dodona_. This gives a beginning to
Oracles in _Greece_: and by their dictates, the Worship of the Dead is
every where introduced.

983. _Sisyphus_, the son of _Æolus_ and grandson of _Hellen_, Reigns in
_Corinth_, and some say that he built that city.

980. _Laius_ recovers the Kingdom of _Thebes_. _Athamas_, the brother of
_Sisyphus_ and father of _Phrixus_ and _Helle_, marries _Ino_ the daughter
of _Cadmus_.

979. _Rehoboam_ Reigns. _Thoas_ is sent from _Crete_ to _Lemnos_, Reigns
there in the city _Hephœstia_, and works in copper and iron.

978. _Alcmena_ born of _Electryo_ the son of _Perseus_ and _Andromeda_, and
of _Lysidice_ the daughter of _Pelops_.

974. _Sesac_ spoils the Temple, and invades _Syria_ and _Persia_, setting
up pillars in many places. _Jeroboam_, becoming subject to _Sesac_, sets up
the worship of the _Egyptian_ Gods in _Israel_.

971. _Sesac_ invades _India_, and returns with triumph the next year but
one: whence _Trieterica Bacchi_. He sets up pillars on two mountains at the
mouth of the river _Ganges_.

968. _Theseus_ Reigns, having overcome the _Minotaur_, and soon after
unites the twelve cities of _Attica_ under one government. _Sesac_, having
carried on his victories to _Mount Caucasus_, leaves his nephew
_Prometheus_ there, and _Æetes_ in _Colchis_.

967. _Sesac_, passing over the _Hellespont_ conquers _Thrace_, kills
_Lycurgus_ King thereof, and gives his Kingdom and one of his singing-women
to _Oeagrus_ the father of _Orpheus_. _Sesac_ had in his army _Ethiopians_
commanded by _Pan_, and _Libyan_ women commanded by _Myrina_ or _Minerva_.
It was the custom of the _Ethiopians_ to dance when they were entring into
a battel, and from their skipping they were painted with goats feet in the
form of Satyrs.

966. _Thoas_, being made King of _Cyprus_ by _Sesac_, goes thither with his
wife _Calycopis_, and leaves his daughter _Hypsipyle_ in _Lemnos_.

965. _Sesac_ is baffled by the _Greeks_ and _Scythians_, loses many of his
women with their Queen _Minerva_, composes the war, is received by
_Amphiction_ at a feast, buries _Ariadne_, goes back through _Asia_ and
_Syria_ into _Egypt_, with innumerable captives, among whom was _Tithonus_,
the son of _Laomedon_ King of _Troy_; and leaves his _Libyan Amazons_,
under _Marthesia_ and _Lampeto_, the successors of _Minerva_, at the river
_Thermodon_. He left also in _Colchos_ Geographical Tables of all his
conquests: And thence Geography had its rise. His singing-women were
celebrated in _Thrace_ by the name of the Muses. And the daughters of
_Pierus_ a _Thracian_, imitating them, were celebrated by the same name.

964. _Minos_, making war upon _Cocalus_ King of _Sicily_, is slain by him.
He was eminent for his Dominion, his Laws and his Justice: upon his
sepulchre visited by _Pythagoras_, was this inscription, ΤΟΥ ΔΙΟΣ the
Sepulchre of _Jupiter_. _Danaus_ with his daughters flying from his brother
_Egyptus_ (that is from _Sesac_) comes into _Greece_. _Sesac_ using the
advice of his Secretary _Thoth_, distributes _Egypt_ into xxxvi _Nomes_,
and in every _Nome_ erects a Temple, and appoints the several Gods,
Festivals and Religions of the several _Nomes_. The Temples were the
sepulchres of his great men, where they were to be buried and worshipped
after death, each in his own Temple, with ceremonies and festivals
appointed by him; while He and his Queen, by the names of _Osiris_ and
_Isis_, were to be worshipped in all _Egypt_. These were the Temples seen
and described by _Lucian_ eleven hundred years after, to be of one and the
same age: and this was the original of the several _Nomes_ of _Egypt_, and
of the several Gods and several Religions of those _Nomes_. _Sesac_ divided
also the land of _Egypt_ by measure amongst his soldiers, and thence
_Geometry_ had its rise. _Hercules_ and _Eurystheus_ born.

963. _Amphictyon_ brings the twelve Gods of _Egypt_ into _Greece_, and
these are the _Dii magni majorum gentium_, to whom the Earth and Planets
and Elements are dedicated.

962. _Phryxus_ and _Helle_ fly from their stepmother _Ino_ the daughter of
_Cadmus_. _Helle_ is drowned in the _Hellespont_, so named from her, but
_Phryxus_ arrived at _Colchos_.

960. The war between the _Lapithæ_ and the people of _Thessaly_ called
_Centaurs_.

958. _Oedipus_ kills his father _Laius_. _Sthenelus_ the son of _Perseus_
Reigns in _Mycene_.

956. _Sesac_ is slain by his brother _Japetus_, who after death was deified
in _Afric_ by the name of _Neptune_, and called _Typhon_ by the
_Egyptians_. _Orus_ Reigns and routs the _Libyans_, who under the conduct
of _Japetus_, and his Son _Antæus_ or _Atlas_, invaded _Egypt_. _Sesac_
from his making the river _Nile_ useful, by cutting channels from it to all
the cities of _Egypt_, was called by its names, _Sihor_ or _Siris_, _Nilus_
and _Egyptus_. The _Greeks_ hearing the _Egyptians_ lament, _O Siris_ and
_Bou Siris_, called him _Osiris_ and _Busiris_. The _Arabians_ from his
great acts called him _Bacchus_, that is, the Great. The _Phrygians_ called
him _Ma-fors_ or _Mavors_, the valiant, and by contraction _Mars_. Because
he set up pillars in all his conquests, and his army in his father's Reign
fought against the _Africans_ with clubs, he is painted with pillars and a
club: and this is that _Hercules_ who, according to _Cicero_, was born upon
the _Nile_, and according to _Eudoxus_, was slain by _Typhon_; and
according to _Diodorus_, was an _Egyptian_, and went over a great part of
the world, and set up the pillars in _Afric_. He seems to be also the
_Belus_ who, according to _Diodorus_, led a Colony of _Egyptians_ to
_Babylon_, and there instituted Priests called _Chaldeans_, who were free
from taxes, and observed the stars, as in _Egypt_. Hitherto _Judah_ and
_Israel_ laboured under great vexations, but henceforward _Asa_ King of
_Judah_ had peace ten years.

947. The _Ethiopians_ invade _Egypt_, and drown _Orus_ in the _Nile_.
Thereupon _Bubaste_ the sister of _Orus_ kills herself, by falling from the
top of an house, and their mother _Isis_ or _Astræa_ goes mad: and thus
ended the Reign of the Gods of _Egypt_.

946. _Zerah_ the _Ethiopian_ is overthrown by _Asa_. The people of the
lower _Egypt_ make _Osarsiphus_ their King, and call in two hundred
thousand _Jews_ and _Phœnicians_ against the _Ethiopians_. _Menes_ or
_Amenophis_ the young son of _Zerah_ and _Cissia_ Reigns.

944. The _Ethiopians_, under _Amenophis_, retire from the lower _Egypt_
and fortify _Memphis_ against _Osarsiphus_. And by these wars and the
_Argonautic_ expedition, the great Empire of _Egypt_ breaks in pieces.
_Eurystheus_ the son of _Sthenelus_ Reigns in _Mycenæ_.

943. _Evander_ and his mother _Carmenta_ carry Letters into _Italy_.

942. _Orpheus_ Deifies the son of _Semele_ by the name of _Bacchus_, and
appoints his Ceremonies.

940. The great men of _Greece_, hearing of the civil wars and distractions
of _Egypt_, resolve to send an embassy to the nations, upon the _Euxine_
and _Mediterranean_ Seas, subject to that Empire, and for that end order
the building of the ship _Argo_.

939. The ship _Argo_ is built after the pattern of the long ship in which
_Danaus_ came into _Greece_: and this was the first long ship built by the
_Greeks_. _Chiron_, who was born in the Golden Age, forms the
Constellations for the use of the _Argonauts_; and places the Solstitial
and Equinoctial Points in the fifteenth degrees or middles of the
Constellations of _Cancer_, _Chelæ_, _Capricorn_, and _Aries_. _Meton_ in
the year of _Nabonassar_ 316, observed the Summer Solstice in the eighth
degree of _Cancer_, and therefore the Solstice had then gone back seven
degrees. It goes back one degree in about seventytwo years, and seven
degrees in about 504 years. Count these years back from the year of
_Nabonassar_ 316, and they will place the _Argonautic_ expedition about 936
years before _Christ_. _Gingris_ the son of _Thoas_ slain, and Deified by
the name of _Adonis_.

938. _Theseus_, being fifty years old, steals _Helena_ then seven years
old. _Pirithous_ the son of _Ixion_, endeavouring to steal _Persephone_ the
daughter of _Orcus_ King of the _Molossians_, is slain by the Dog of
_Orcus_; and his companion _Theseus_ is taken and imprisoned. _Helena_ is
set at liberty by her brothers.

937. The _Argonautic_ expedition. _Prometheus_ leaves _Mount Caucasus_,
being set at liberty by _Hercules_. _Laomedon_ King of _Troy_ is slain by
_Hercules_. _Priam_ succeeds him. _Talus_ a brazen man, of the Brazen Age,
the son of _Minos_, is slain by the _Argonauts_. _Æsculapius_ and
_Hercules_ were _Argonauts_, and _Hippocrates_ was the eighteenth from
_Æsculapius_ by the father's side, and the nineteenth from _Hercules_ by
the mother's side; and because these generations, being noted in history,
were most probably by the chief of the family, and for the most part by the
eldest sons; we may reckon 28 or at the most 30 years to a generation: and
thus the seventeen intervals by the father's side and eighteen by the
mother's, will at a middle reckoning amount unto about 507 years; which
being counted backwards from the beginning of the _Peloponnesian_ war, at
which time _Hippocrates_ began to flourish, will reach up to the time where
we have placed the _Argonautic_ expedition.

936. _Theseus_ is set at liberty by _Hercules_.

934. The hunting of the _Calydonian_ boar slain by _Meleager_.

930. _Amenophis_, with an army out of _Ethiopia_ and _Thebais_, invades the
lower _Egypt_, conquers _Osarsiphus_, and drives out the _Jews_ and
_Canaanites_: and this is reckoned the second expulsion of the Shepherds.
_Calycopis_ dies, and is Deified by _Thoas_ with Temples at _Paphos_ and
_Amathus_ in _Cyprus_, and at _Byblus_ in _Syria_, and with Priests and
sacred Rites, and becomes the _Venus_ of the ancients, and the _Dea Cypria_
and _Dea Syria_. And from these and other places where Temples were erected
to her, she was also called _Paphia_, _Amathusia_, _Byblia_, _Cytherea_,
_Salaminia_, _Cnidia_, _Erycina_, _Idalia_, &c. And her three waiting-women
became the three Graces.

928. The war of the seven Captains against _Thebes_.

927. _Hercules_ and _Æsculapius_ are Deified. _Eurystheus_ drives the
_Heraclides_ out of _Peloponnesus_. He is slain by _Hyllus_ the son of
_Hercules_. _Atreus_ the son of _Pelops_ succeeds him in the Kingdom of
_Mycenæ_. _Menestheus_, the great grandson of _Erechtheus_, Reigns at
_Athens_.

925. _Theseus_ is slain, being cast down from a rock.

924. _Hyllus_ invading _Peloponnesus_ is slain by _Echemus_.

919. _Atreus_ dies. _Agamemnon_ Reigns. In the absence of _Menelaus_, who
went to look after what his father _Atreus_ had left to him, _Paris_ steals
_Helena_.

918. The second war against _Thebes_.

912. _Thoas_, King of _Cyprus_ and part of _Phœnicia_ dies; and for making
armour for the Kings of _Egypt_; is Deified with a sumptuous Temple at
_Memphis_ by the name of _Baal Canaan_, _Vulcan_. This Temple was said to
be built by _Menes_, the first King of _Egypt_ who reigned next after the
Gods, that is, by _Menoph_ or _Amenophis_ who reigned next after the death
of _Osiris_, _Isis_, _Orus_, _Bubaste_ and _Thoth_. The city, _Memphis_ was
also said to be built by _Menes_; he began to build it when he fortified it
against _Osarsiphus_. And from him it was called _Menoph_, _Moph_, _Noph_,
&c; and is to this day called _Menuf_ by the _Arabians_. And therefore
_Menes_ who built the city and temple Was _Menoph_ or _Amenophis_. The
Priests of _Egypt_ at length made this temple above a thousand years older
then _Amenophis_, and some of them five or ten thousand years older: but it
could not be above two or three hundred years older than the Reign of
_Psammiticus_ who finished it, and died 614 years before _Christ_. When
_Menoph_ or _Menes_ built the city, he built a bridge there over the
_Nile_: a work too great to be older than the Monarchy of _Egypt_.

909. _Amenophis_, called _Memnon_ by the _Greeks_, built the _Memnonia_ at
_Susa_, whilst _Egypt_ was under the government of _Proteus_ his Viceroy.

904. _Troy_ taken. _Amenophis_ was still at _Susa_; the _Greeks_ feigning
that he came from thence to the _Trojan_ war.

903. _Demophoon_, the son of _Theseus_ by _Phœdra_ the daughter of _Minos_,
Reigns at _Athens_.

901. _Amenophis_ builds small Pyramids in _Cochome_.

896. _Ulysses_ leaves _Calypso_ in the Island _Ogygie_ (perhaps _Cadis_ or
_Cales_.) She was the daughter of _Atlas_, according to _Homer_. The
ancients at length feigned that this Island, (which from _Atlas_ they
called _Atlantis_) had been as big as all _Europe_, _Africa_ and _Asia_,
but was sunk into the Sea.

895. _Teucer_ builds _Salamis_ in _Cyprus_. _Hadad_ or _Benhadad_ King of
_Syria_ dies, and is Deified at _Damascus_ with a Temple and Ceremonies.

887. _Amenophis_ dies, and is succeeded by his son _Ramesses_ or
_Rhampsinitus_, who builds the western Portico of the Temple of _Vulcan_.
The _Egyptians_ dedicated to _Osiris_, _Isis_, _Orus_ senior, _Typhon_, and
_Nephthe_ the sister and wife of _Typhon_, the five days added by the
_Egyptians_ to the twelve Calendar months of the old Luni-solar year, and
said that they were added when these five Princes were born. They were
therefore added in the Reign of _Ammon_ the father of these five Princes:
but this year was scarce brought into common use before the Reign of
_Amenophis_: for in his Temple or Sepulchre at _Abydus_, they placed a
Circle of 365 cubits in compass, covered on the upper side with a plate of
gold, and divided into 365 equal parts, to represent all the days of the
year; every part having the day of the year, and the Heliacal Risings and
Settings of the Stars on that day, noted upon it. And this Circle remained
there 'till _Cambyses_ spoiled the temples of _Egypt_: and from this
monument I collect that it was _Amenophis_ who established this year,
fixing the beginning thereof to one of the four Cardinal Points of the
heavens. For had not the beginning thereof been now fixed, the Heliacal
Risings and Settings of the Stars could not have been noted upon the days
thereof. The Priests of _Egypt_ therefore in the Reign of _Amenophis_
continued to observe the Heliacal Risings and Settings of the Stars upon
every day. And when by the Sun's Meridional Altitudes they had found the
Solstices and Equinoxes according to the Sun's mean motion, his Equation
being not yet known, they fixed the beginning of this year to the Vernal
Equinox, and in memory thereof erected this monument. Now this year being
carried into _Chaldæa_, the _Chaldæans_ began their year of _Nabonassar_ on
the same _Thoth_ with the _Egyptians_, and made it of the same length. And
the _Thoth_ of the first year of _Nabonassar_ fell upon the 26th day of
_February_: which was 33 days and five hours before the Vernal Equinox,
according to the Sun's mean motion. And the _Thoth_ of this year moves
backwards 33 days and five hours in 137 years, and therefore fell upon the
Vernal Equinox 137 years before the _Æra_ of _Nabonassar_ began; that is,
884 years before _Christ_. And if it began upon the day next after the
Vernal Equinox, it might begin three or four years earlier; and there we
may place the death of this King. The _Greeks_ feigned that he was the Son
of _Tithonus_, and therefore he was born after the return of _Sesac_ into
_Egypt_, with _Tithonus_ and other captives, and so might be about 70 or 75
years old at his death.

883. _Dido_ builds _Carthage_, and the _Phœnicians_ begin presently after
to sail as far as to the _Straights Mouth_, and beyond. _Æneas_ was still
alive, according to _Virgil_.

870. _Hesiod_ flourishes. He hath told us himself that he lived in the age
next after the wars of _Thebes_ and _Troy_, and that this age should end
when the men then living grew hoary and dropt into the grave; and therefore
it was but of an ordinary length: and _Herodotus_ has told us that _Hesiod_
and _Homer_ were but 400 years older than himself. Whence it follows that
the destruction of _Troy_ was not older than we have represented it.

860. _Mœris_ Reigns in _Egypt_. He adorned _Memphis_, and translated the
seat of his Empire thither from _Thebes_. There he built the famous
Labyrinth, and the northern portico of the Temple of _Vulcan_, and dug the
great Lake called the Lake of _Mœris_, and upon the bottom of it built two
great Pyramids of brick: and these things being not mentioned by _Homer_ or
_Hesiod_, were unknown to them, and done after their days. _Mœris_ wrote
also a book of Geometry.

852. _Hazael_ the successor of _Hadad_ at _Damascus_ dies and is Deified,
as was _Hadad_ before: and these Gods, together with _Arathes_ the wife of
_Hadad_, were worshipt in their Sepulchres or Temples, 'till the days of
_Josephus_ the _Jew_; and the _Syrians_ boasted their antiquity, not
knowing, saith _Josephus_, that they were novel.

844. The _Æolic_ Migration. _Bœotia_, formerly called _Cadmeis_, is seized
by the _Bœotians_.

838. _Cheops_ Reigns in _Egypt_. He built the greatest Pyramid for his
sepulchre, and forbad the worship of the former Kings; intending to have
been worshipped himself.

825. The _Heraclides_, after three Generations, or an hundred years,
reckoned from their former expedition, return into _Peloponnesus_.
Henceforward, to the end of the first _Messenian_ war, reigned ten Kings of
_Sparta_ by one Race, and nine by another; ten of _Messene_, and nine of
_Arcadia_: which, by reckoning (according to the ordinary course of nature)
about twenty years to a Reign, one Reign with another, will take up about
190 years. And the seven Reigns more in one of the two Races of the Kings
of _Sparta_, and eight in the other, to the battle at _Thermopylæ_; may
take up 150 years more: and so place the return of the _Heraclides_, about
820 years before _Christ_.

824. _Cephren_ Reigns in _Egypt_, and builds another great Pyramid.

808. _Mycerinus_ Reigns there, and begins the third great Pyramid. He shut
up the body of his daughter in a hollow ox, and caused her to be worshipped
daily with odours.

804. The war, between the _Athenians_ and _Spartans_, in which _Codrus_,
King of the _Athenians_, is slain.

801. _Nitocris_, the sister of _Mycerinus_, succeeds him, and finishes the
third great Pyramid.

794. The _Ionic_ Migration, under the conduct of the sons of _Codrus_.

790. _Pul_ founds the _Assyrian_ Empire.

788. _Asychis_ Reigns in _Egypt_, and builds the eastern Portico of the
Temple of _Vulcan_ very splendidly; and a large Pyramid of brick, made of
mud dug out of the Lake of _Mœris_. _Egypt_ breaks into several Kingdoms.
_Gnephactus_ and _Bocchoris_ Reign successively in the upper _Egypt_;
_Stephanathis_; _Necepsos_ and _Nechus_, at _Sais_; _Anysis_ or _Amosis_,
at _Anysis_ or _Hanes_; and _Tacellotis_, at _Bubaste_.

776. _Iphitus_ restores the Olympiads. And from this _Æra_ the Olympiads
are now reckoned. _Gnephactus_ Reigns at _Memphis_.

772. _Necepsos_ and _Petosiris_ invent Astrology in _Egypt_.

760. _Semiramis_ begins to flourish; _Sanchoniatho_ writes.

751. _Sabacon_ the _Ethiopian_, invades _Egypt_, now divided into various
Kingdoms, burns _Bocchoris_, slays _Nechus_, and makes _Anysis_ fly.

747. _Pul_, King of _Assyria_, dies, and is succeeded at _Nineveh_ by
_Tiglathpilasser_, and at _Babylon_ by _Nabonassar_. The _Egyptians_, who
fled from _Sabacon_, carry their Astrology and Astronomy to _Babylon_, and
found the _Æra_ of _Nabonassar_ in _Egyptian_ years.

740. _Tiglathpilasser_, King of _Assyria_, takes _Damascus_, and captivates
the _Syrians_.

729. _Tiglathpilasser_ is succeeded by _Salmanasser_.

721. _Salmanasser_, King of _Assyria_, carries the Ten Tribes into
captivity.

719. _Sennacherib_ Reigns over _Assyria_. _Archias_ the son of _Evagetus_,
of the stock of _Hercules_, leads a Colony from _Corinth_ into _Sicily_,
and builds _Syracuse_.

717. _Tirhakah_ Reigns in _Ethiopia_.

714. _Sennacherib_ is put to flight by the _Ethiopians_ and _Egyptians_,
with great slaughter.

711. The _Medes_ revolt from the _Assyrians_. _Sennacherib_ slain.
_Asserhadon_ succeeds him. This is that _Asserhadon-Pul_, or
_Sardanapalus_, the son of _Anacyndaraxis_, or _Sennacherib_, who built
_Tarsus_ and _Anchiale_ in one day.

710. _Lycurgus_, brings the poems of _Homer_ out of _Asia_ into _Greece_.

708. _Lycurgus_, becomes tutor to _Charillus_ or _Charilaus_, the young
King of _Sparta_. _Aristotle_ makes _Lycurgus_ as old as _Iphitus_, because
his name was upon the Olympic Disc. But the Disc was one of the five games
called the _Quinquertium_, and the _Quinquertium_ was first instituted upon
the eighteenth Olympiad. _Socrates_ and _Thucydides_ made the institutions
of _Lycurgus_ about 300 years older than the end of the _Peloponnesian_
war, that is, 705 years before _Christ_.

701. _Sabacon_, after a Reign of 50 years, relinquishes _Egypt_ to his son
_Sevechus_ or _Sethon_, who becomes Priest of _Vulcan_, and neglects
military affairs.

698. _Manasseh_ Reigns.

697. The _Corinthians_ begin first of any men to build ships with three
orders of oars, called _Triremes_. Hitherto the _Greeks_ had used long
vessels of fifty oars.

687. _Tirhakah_ Reigns in _Egypt_.

681. _Asserhadon_ invades _Babylon_.

673. The _Jews_ conquered by _Asserhadon_, and _Manasseh_ carried captive
to _Babylon_.

671. _Asserbadon_ invades _Egypt_. The government of _Egypt_ committed to
twelve princes.

668. The western nations of _Syria_, _Phœnicia_ and _Egypt_, revolt from
the _Assyrians_. _Asserhadon_ dies, and is succeeded by _Saosduchinus_.
_Manasseh_ returns from Captivity.

658. _Phraortes_ Reigns in _Media_. The _Prytanes_ Reign in _Corinth_,
expelling their Kings.

657. The _Corinthians_ overcome the _Corcyreans_ at sea: and this was the
oldest sea fight.

655. _Psammiticus_ becomes King of all _Egypt_, by conquering the other
eleven Kings with whom he had already reigned fifteen years: he reigned
about 39 years more. Henceforward the _Ionians_ had access into _Egypt_;
and thence came the _Ionian_ Philosophy, Astronomy and Geometry.

652. The first _Messenian_ war begins: it lasted twenty years.

647. _Charops_, the first decennial Archon of the _Athenians_. Some of
these Archons might dye before the end of the ten years, and the remainder
of the ten years be supplied by a new Archon. And hence the seven decennial
Archons might not take up above forty or fifty years. _Saosduchinus_ King
of _Assyria_ dies, and is succeeded by _Chyniladon_.

640. _Josiah_ Reigns in _Judæa_.

636. _Phraortes_> King of the _Medes_, is slain in a war against the
_Assyrians_. _Astyages_ succeeds him.

635. The _Scythians_ invade the _Medes_ and _Assyrians_.

633. _Battus_ builds _Cyrene_, where _Irasa_, the city of _Antæus_, had
stood.

627. _Rome_ is built.

625. _Nabopolassar_ revolts from the King of _Assyria_, and Reigns over
_Babylon_. _Phalantus_ leads the _Parthenians_ into _Italy_, and builds
_Tarentum._

617. _Psammiticus_ dies. _Nechaoh_ reigns in _Egypt_.

611. _Cyaxeres_ Reigns over the _Medes_.

610. The Princes of the _Scythians_ slain in a feast by _Cyaxeres_.

609. _Josiah_ slain. _Cyaxeres_ and _Nebuchadnezzar_ overthrow _Nineveh_,
and, by sharing the _Assyrian_ Empire, grow great.

607. _Creon_ the first annual Archon of the _Athenians_. The second
_Messenian_ war begins. _Cyaxeres_ makes the _Scythians_ retire beyond
_Colchos_ and _Iberia_, and seizes the _Assyrian_ Provinces of _Armenia_,
_Pontus_ and _Cappadocia_.

606. _Nebuchadnezzar_ invades _Syria_ and _Judæa_.

604. _Nabopolassar_ dies, and is succeeded by his Son _Nebuchadnezzar_, who
had already Reigned two years with his father.

600. _Darius_ the _Mede_, the son of _Cyaxeres,_ is born.

599. _Cyrus_ is born of _Mandane_, the Sister of _Cyaxeres_, and daughter
of _Astyages_.

596. _Susiana_ and _Elam_ conquered by _Nebuchadnezzar_. _Caranus_ and
_Perdiccas_ fly from _Phidon_, and found the Kingdom of _Macedon_. _Phidon_
introduces Weights and Measures, and the Coining of Silver Money.

590. _Cyaxeres_ makes war upon _Alyattes_ King of _Lydia_.

588. The Temple of _Solomon_ is burnt by _Nebuchadnezzar_. The _Messenians_
being conquered, fly into _Sicily_, and build _Messana_.

585. In the sixth year of the _Lydian_ war, a total Eclipse of the Sun,
predicted by _Thales_, _May_ the 28th, puts an end to a Battel between the
_Medes_ and _Lydians_: Whereupon they make Peace, and ratify it by a
marriage between _Darius Medus_ the son of _Cyaxeres_, and _Ariene_ the
daughter of _Alyattes_.

584. _Phidon_ presides in the 49th Olympiad.

580. _Phidon_ is overthrown. Two men chosen by lot, out of the city _Elis_,
to preside in the Olympic Games.

572. _Draco_ is Archon of the _Athenians_, and makes laws for them.

568. The _Amphictions_ make war upon the _Cirrheans_, by the advice of
_Solon_, and take _Cirrha_. _Clisthenes_, _Alcmæon_ and _Eurolicus_
commanded the forces of the _Amphictions_, and were contemporary to
_Phidon_. For _Leocides_ the son of _Phidon_, and _Megacles_ the son of
_Alcmæon,_ at one and the same time, courted _Agarista_ the daughter of
_Clisthenes_.

569. _Nebuchadnezzar_ invades _Egypt_. _Darius_ the _Mede_ Reigns.

562. _Solon_, being Archon of the _Athenians_, makes laws for them.

557. _Periander_ dies, and _Corinth_ becomes free from Tyrants.

555. _Nabonadius_ Reigns at _Babylon_. His Mother _Nitocris_ adorns and
fortifies that City.

550. _Pisistratus_ becomes Tyrant at _Athens._ The Conference between
_Crœsus_ and _Solon_.

549. _Solon_ dies, _Hegestratus_ being Archon of _Athens_.

544. _Sardes_ is taken by _Cyrus_. _Darius_ the _Mede_ recoins the _Lydian_
money into _Darics_.

538. _Babylon_ is taken by _Cyrus_.

536. _Cyrus_ overcomes _Darius_ the _Mede_, and translates the Empire to
the _Persians_. The _Jews_ return from Captivity, and found the second
Temple.

529. _Cyrus_ dies. _Cambyses_ Reigns,

521. _Darius_ the son of _Hystaspes_ Reigns. The _Magi_ are slain. The
various Religions of the several Nations of _Persia_, which consisted in
the worship of their ancient Kings, are abolished; and by the influence of
_Hystaspes_ and _Zoroaster_, the worship of One God, at Altars, without
Temples is set up in all _Persia_.

520. The second Temple is built at _Jerusalem_ by the command of _Darius_.

515. The second Temple is finished and dedicated.

513. _Harmodius_ and _Aristogiton_, slay _Hipparchus_ the son of
_Pisistratus_, Tyrant of the _Athenians._

508. The Kings of the _Romans_ expelled, and Consuls erected.

491. The Battle of _Marathon_.

485. _Xerxes_ Reigns.

480. The Passage of _Xerxes_ over the _Hellespont_ into _Greece_, and
Battles of _Thermopylæ_ and _Salamis_.

464. _Artaxerxes Longimanus_ Reigns.

457. _Ezra_ returns into _Judæa_. _Johanan_ the father of _Jaddua_ was now
grown up, having a chamber in the Temple.

444. _Nehemiah_ returns into _Judæa_. _Herodotus_ writes.

431. The _Peloponnesian_ war begins.

428. _Nehemiah_ drives away _Manasseh_ the brother of _Jaddua_, because he
had married _Nicaso_ the daughter of _Sanballat_.

424. _Darius Nothus_ Reigns.

422. _Sanballat_ builds a Temple in _Mount Gerizim_ and makes his
son-in-law _Manasseh_ the first High-Priest thereof.

412. Hitherto the Priests and Levites were numbered, and written in the
Chronicles of the _Jews_, before the death of _Nehemiah_: at which time
either _Johanan_ or _Jaddua_ was High-Priest, And here Ends the Sacred
History of the _Jews_.

405. _Artaxerxes Mnemon_ Reigns. The end of the _Peloponnesian_ war.

359. _Artaxerxes Ochus_ Reigns.

338. _Arogus_ Reigns.

336. _Darius Codomannus_ Reigns.

332. The _Persian_ Empire conquered by _Alexander_ the great.

331. _Darius Codomannus_, the last King of _Persia_, slain.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE

CHRONOLOGY

OF ANCIENT KINGDOMS AMENDED.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. I.

_Of the Chronology of the First Ages of the _Greeks_._

All Nations, before they began to keep exact accounts of Time, have been
prone to raise their Antiquities; and this humour has been promoted, by the
Contentions between Nations about their Originals. _Herodotus_ [3] tells
us, that the Priests of _Egypt_ reckoned from the Reign of _Menes_ to that
of _Sethon_, who put _Sennacherib_ to flight, three hundred forty and one
Generations of men, and as many Priests of _Vulcan_, and as many Kings of
_Egypt_: and that three hundred Generations make ten thousand years; _for_,
saith he, _three Generations of men make an hundred years_: and the
remaining forty and one Generations make 1340 years: and so the whole time
from the Reign of _Menes_ to that of _Sethon_ was 11340 years. And by this
way of reckoning, and allotting longer Reigns to the Gods of _Egypt_ than
to the Kings which followed them, _Herodotus_ tells us from the Priests of
_Egypt_, that from _Pan_ to _Amosis_ were 15000 years, and from _Hercules_
to _Amosis_ 17000 years. So also the _Chaldæans_ boasted of their
Antiquity; for _Callisthenes_, the Disciple of _Aristotle_, sent
Astronomical Observations from _Babylon_ to _Greece_, said to be of 1903
years standing before the times of _Alexander_ the great. And the
_Chaldæans_ boasted further, that they had observed the Stars 473000 years;
and there were others who made the Kingdoms of _Assyria_, _Media_ and
_Damascus_, much older than the truth.

Some of the _Greeks_ called the times before the Reign of _Ogyges_,
Unknown, because they had No History of them; those between his flood and
the beginning of the Olympiads, Fabulous, because their History was much
mixed with Poetical Fables: and those after the beginning of the Olympiads,
Historical, because their History was free from such Fables. The fabulous
Ages wanted a good Chronology, and so also did the Historical, for the
first 60 or 70 Olympiads.

The _Europeans_, had no Chronology before the times of the _Persian_
Empire: and whatsoever Chronology they now have of ancienter times, hath
been framed since, by reasoning and conjecture. In the beginning of that
Monarchy, _Acusilaus_ made _Phoroneus_ as old as _Ogyges_ and his flood,
and that flood 1020 years older than the first Olympiad; which is above 680
years older than the truth: and to make out this reckoning his followers
have encreased the Reigns of Kings in length and number. _Plutarch_ [4]
tells us that the Philosophers anciently delivered their Opinions in Verse,
as _Orpheus_, _Hesiod_, _Parmenides_, _Xenophanes_, _Empedocles_, _Thales_;
but afterwards left off the use of Verses; and that _Aristarchus_,
_Timocharis_, _Aristillus_, _Hipparchus_, did not make Astronomy the more
contemptible by describing it in Prose; after _Eudoxus_, _Hesiod_, and
_Thales_ had wrote of it in Verse. _Solon_ wrote [5] in Verse, and all the
Seven Wise Men were addicted to Poetry, as _Anaximenes_ [6] affirmed. 'Till
those days the _Greeks_ wrote only in Verse, and while they did so there
could be no Chronology, nor any other History, than such as was mixed with
poetical fancies. _Pliny_, [7] in reckoning up the Inventors of things,
tells us, _that _Pherecydes Syrius_ taught to compose discourses in Prose
in the Reign of _Cyrus_, and _Cadmus Milesius_ to write History._ And in
[8] another place he saith _that _Cadmus Milesius_ was the first that wrote
in Prose_. _Josephus_ tells us [9] that _Cadmus Milesius_ and _Acusilaus_
were but a little before the expedition of the _Persians_ against the
_Greeks_: and _Suidas_ [10] calls _Acusilaus_ a most ancient Historian, and
saith that _he wrote Genealogies out of tables of brass, which his father,
as was reported, found in a corner of his house_. Who hid them there may be
doubted: For the _Greeks_ [11] had no publick table or inscription older
than the Laws of _Draco_. _Pherecydes Atheniensis_, in the Reign of _Darius
Hystaspis_, or soon after, wrote of the Antiquities and ancient Genealogies
of the _Athenians_, in ten books; and was one of the first _European_
writers of this kind, and one of the best; whence he had the name of
_Genealogus_; and by _Dionysius [12] Halicarnassensis_ is said to be second
to none of the Genealogers. _Epimenides_, not the Philosopher, but an
Historian, wrote also of the ancient Genealogies: and _Hellanicus_, who was
twelve years older than _Herodotus_, digested his History by the Ages or
Successions of the Priestesses of _Juno Argiva_. Others digested theirs by
those of the Archons of _Athens_, or Kings of the _Lacedæmonians_.
_Hippias_ the _Elean_ published a Breviary of the Olympiads, supported by
no certain arguments, as _Plutarch_ [13] tells us: he lived in the 105th
Olympiad, and was derided by _Plato_ for his Ignorance. This Breviary seems
to have contained nothing more than a short account of the Victors in every
Olympiad. Then [14] _Ephorus_, the disciple of _Isocrates_, formed a
Chronological History of _Greece_, beginning with the Return of the
_Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_, and ending with the Siege of _Perinthus_,
in the twentieth year of _Philip_ the father of _Alexander_ the great, that
is, eleven years before the fall of the _Persian_ Empire: but [15] he
digested things by Generations, and the reckoning by the Olympiads, or by
any other _Æra_, was not yet in use among the _Greeks_. The _Arundelian_
Marbles were composed sixty years after the death of _Alexander_ the great
(_An._ 4. _Olymp._ 128.) and yet mention not the Olympiads, nor any other
standing _Æra_, but reckon backwards from the time then present. But
Chronology was now reduced to a reckoning by Years; and in the next
Olympiad _Timæus Siculus_ improved it: for he wrote a History in Several
books, down to his own times, according to the Olympiads; comparing the
_Ephori_, the Kings of _Sparta_, the Archons of _Athens_, and the
Priestesses of _Argos_ with the Olympic Victors, so as to make the
Olympiads, and the Genealogies and Successions of Kings and Priestesses,
and the Poetical Histories suit with one another, according to the best of
his judgment: and where he left off, _Polybius_ began, and carried on the
History. _Eratosthenes_ wrote above an hundred years after the death of
_Alexander_ the great: He was followed by _Apollodorus_; and these two have
been followed ever since by Chronologers.

But how uncertain their Chronology is, and how doubtful it was reputed by
the _Greeks_ of those times, may be understood by these passages of
_Plutarch_. _Some reckon _Lycurgus__, saith he, [16] _contemporary to
_Iphitus_, and to have been his companion in ordering the Olympic
festivals, amongst whom was _Aristotle_ the Philosopher; arguing from the
Olympic Disc, which had the name of _Lycurgus_ upon it. Others supputing
the times by the Kings of _Lacedæmon_, as _Eratosthenes_ and _Apollodorus_,
affirm that he was not a few years older than the first Olympiad._ He began
to flourish in the 17th or 18th Olympiad, and at length _Aristotle_ made
him as old as the first Olympiad; and so did _Epaminondas_, as he is cited
by _Ælian_ and _Plutarch_: and then _Eratosthenes_, _Apollodorus_, and
their followers, made him above an hundred years older.

And in another place _Plutarch_ [17] tells us: _The Congress of _Solon_
with _Crœsus_, some think they can confute by Chronology. But a History so
illustrious, and verified by so many witnesses, and which is more, so
agreeable to the manners of _Solon_, and worthy of the greatness of his
mind, and of his wisdom, I cannot persuade my self to reject because of
some Chronological Canons, as they call them, which hundreds of authors
correcting, have not yet been able to constitute any thing certain, in
which they could agree amongst themselves, about repugnancies._

As for the Chronology of the _Latines_, that is still more uncertain.
_Plutarch_ [18] represents great uncertainties in the Originals of _Rome_,
and so doth _Servius_ [19]. The old Records of the _Latines_ were burnt
[20] by the _Gauls_, an hundred and twenty years after the Regifuge, and
sixty-four years before the death of _Alexander_ the great: and _Quintus
Fabius Pictor_, [21] the oldest Historian of the _Latines_, lived an
hundred years later than that King, and took almost all things from
_Diocles Peparethius_, a _Greek_. The Chronologers of _Gallia_, _Spain_,
_Germany_, _Scythia_, _Swedeland_, _Britain_ and _Ireland_ are of a date
still later; for _Scythia_ beyond the _Danube_ had no letters, 'till
_Ulphilas_ their Bishop formed them; which was about six hundred years
after the death of _Alexander_ the great: and _Germany_ had none 'till it
received them, from the western Empire of the _Latines_, above seven
hundred years after the death of that King. The _Hunns_, had none in the
days of _Procopius_, who flourished 850 years after the death of that King:
and _Sweden_ and _Norway_ received them still later. And things said to be
done above one or two hundred years before the use of letters, are of
little credit.

_Diodorus_, [22] in the beginning of his History tells us, that he did not
define by any certain space the times preceding the _Trojan_ War, because
he had no certain foundation to rely upon: but from the _Trojan_ war,
according to the reckoning of _Apollodorus_, whom he followed, there were
eighty years to the Return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_; and
that from that Period to the first Olympiad, there were three hundred and
twenty eight years, computing the times from the Kings of the
_Lacedæmonians_. _Apollodorus_ followed _Eratosthenes_, and both of them
followed _Thucydides_, in reckoning eighty years from the _Trojan_ war to
the Return of the _Heraclides_: but in reckoning 328 years from that Return
to the first Olympiad, _Diodorus_ tells us, that the times were computed
from the Kings of the _Lacedæmonians_; and _Plutarch_ [23] tells us, that
_Apollodorus_, _Eratosthenes_ and others followed that computation: and
since this reckoning is still received by Chronologers, and was gathered by
computing the times from the Kings of the _Lacedæmonians_, that is from
their number, let us re-examin that Computation.

The _Egyptians_ reckoned the Reigns of Kings equipollent to Generations of
men, and three Generations to an hundred years, as above; and so did the
_Greeks_ and _Latines_: and accordingly they have made their Kings Reign
one with another thirty and three years a-piece, and above. For they make
the seven Kings of _Rome_ who preceded the Consuls to have Reigned 244
years, which is 35 years a-piece: and the first twelve Kings of _Sicyon_,
_Ægialeus_, _Europs_, &c. to have Reigned 529 years, which is 44 years
a-piece: and the first eight Kings of _Argos_, _Inachus_, _Phoroneus_, &c.
to have Reigned 371 years, which is above 46 years a-piece: and between the
Return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_, and the end of the first
_Messenian_ war, the ten Kings of _Sparta_ in one Race; _Eurysthenes_,
_Agis_, _Echestratus_, _Labotas_, _Doryagus_, _Agesilaus_, _Archelaus_,
_Teleclus_, _Alcamenes_, and _Polydorus_: the nine in the other Race;
_Procles_, _Sous_, _Eurypon_, _Prytanis_, _Eunomus_, _Polydectes_,
_Charilaus_, _Nicander_, _Theopompus_: the ten Kings of _Messene_;
_Cresphontes_, _Epytus_, _Glaucus_, _Isthmius_, _Dotadas_, _Sibotas_,
_Phintas_, _Antiochus_, _Euphaes_, _Aristodemus_: and the nine of
_Arcadia_; _Cypselus_, _Olæas_, _Buchalion_, _Phialus_, _Simus_, _Pompus_,
_Ægineta_, _Polymnestor_, _Æchmis_, according to Chronologers, took up 379
years: which is 38 years a-piece to the ten Kings, and 42 years a-piece to
the nine. And the five Kings of the Race of _Eurysthenes_, between the end
of the first _Messenian_ war, and the beginning of the Reign of _Darius
Hystaspis_; _Eurycrates_, _Anaxander_, _Eurycrates II_, _Leon_,
_Anaxandrides_, Reigned 202 years, which is above 40 years a-piece.

Thus the _Greek_ Chronologers, who follow _Timæus_ and _Eratosthenes_, have
made the Kings of their several Cities, who lived before the times of the
_Persian_ Empire, to Reign about 35 or 40 years a-piece, one with another;
which is a length so much beyond the course of nature, as is not to be
credited. For by the ordinary course of nature Kings Reign, one with
another, about eighteen or twenty years a-piece: and if in some instances
they Reign, one with another, five or six years longer, in others they
Reign as much shorter: eighteen or twenty years is a medium. So the
eighteen Kings of _Judah_ who succeeded _Solomon_, Reigned 390 years, which
is one with another 22 years a-piece. The fifteen Kings of _Israel_ after
_Solomon_, Reigned 259 years, which is 17¼ years a-piece. The eighteen
Kings of _Babylon_, _Nabonassar_ &c. Reigned 209 years, which is 11⅔ years
a-piece. The ten Kings of _Persia_; _Cyrus_, _Cambyses_, &c. Reigned 208
years, which is almost 21 years a piece. The sixteen Successors of
_Alexander_ the great, and of his brother and son in _Syria_; _Seleucus_,
_Antiochus Soter_, &c. Reigned 244 years, after the breaking of that
Monarchy into various Kingdoms, which is 15¼ years a-piece. The eleven
Kings of _Egypt_; _Ptolomæus Lagi_, &c. Reigned 277 years, counted from the
same Period, which is 25 years a-piece. The eight in _Macedonia_;
_Cassander_, &c. Reigned 138 years, which is 17¼ years a-piece. The thirty
Kings of _England_; _William_ the Conqueror, _William Rufus_, &c. Reigned
648 years, which is 21½ years a-piece. The first twenty four Kings of
_France_; _Pharamundus_, &c. Reigned 458 years, which is 19 years a-piece:
the next twenty four Kings of _France_; _Ludovicus Balbus_, &c. 451 years,
which is 18¾ years a-piece: the next fifteen, _Philip Valesius_, &c. 315
years, which is 21 years a-piece: and all the sixty three Kings of
_France_, 1224 years, which is 19½ years a-piece. Generations from father
to son, may be reckoned one with another at about 33 or 34 years a-piece,
or about three Generations to an hundred years: but if the reckoning
proceed by the eldest sons, they are shorter, so that three of them may be
reckoned at about 75 or 80 years: and the Reigns of Kings are still
shorter, because Kings are succeeded not only by their eldest sons, but
sometimes by their brothers, and sometimes they are slain or deposed; and
succeeded by others of an equal or greater age, especially in elective or
turbulent Kingdoms. In the later Ages, since Chronology hath been exact,
there is scarce an instance to be found of ten Kings Reigning any where in
continual Succession above 260 years: but _Timæus_ and his followers, and I
think also some of his Predecessors, after the example of the _Egyptians_,
have taken the Reigns of Kings for Generations, and reckoned three
Generations to an hundred, and sometimes to an hundred and twenty years;
and founded the Technical Chronology of the _Greeks_ upon this way of
reckoning. Let the reckoning be reduced to the course of nature, by putting
the Reigns of Kings one with another, at about eighteen or twenty years
a-piece: and the ten Kings of _Sparta_ by one Race, the nine by another
Race, the ten Kings of _Messene_, and the nine of _Arcadia_, above
mentioned, between the Return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_, and
the end of the first _Messenian_ war, will scarce take up above 180 or 190
years: whereas according to Chronologers they took up 379 years.

For confirming this reckoning, I may add another argument. _Euryleon_ the
son of _Ægeus_, [24] commanded the main body of the _Messenians_ in the
fifth year of the first _Messenian_ war, and was in the fifth Generation
from _Oiolicus_ the son _Theras_, the brother-in-law of _Aristodemus_, and
tutor to his sons _Eurysthenes_ and _Procles_, as _Pausanias_ [25] relates:
and by consequence, from the return of the _Heraclides_, which was in the
days of _Theras_, to the battle which was in the fifth year of this war,
there were six Generations, which, as I conceive, being for the most part
by the eldest sons, will scarce exceed thirty years to a Generation; and so
may amount unto 170 or 180 years. That war lasted 19 or 20 years: add the
last 15 years, and there will be about 190 years to the end of that war:
whereas the followers of _Timæus_ make it about 379 years, which is above
sixty years to a Generation.

By these arguments, Chronologers have lengthned the time, between the
return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_ and the first _Messenian_
war, adding to it about 190 years: and they have also lengthned the time,
between that war and the rise of the _Persian_ Empire. For in the Race of
the _Spartan_ Kings, descended from _Eurysthenes_; after _Polydorus_,
reigned [26] these Kings, _Eurycrates_, _Anaxander_, _Eurycratides_,
_Leon_, _Anaxandrides_, _Clomenes_, _Leonidas_, &c. And in the other Race
descended from _Procles_; after _Theopompus_, reigned [27] these,
_Anaxandrides_, _Archidemus_, _Anaxileus_, _Leutychides_, _Hippocratides_,
_Ariston_, _Demaratus_, _Leutychides_ II. &c. according to _Herodotus_.
These Kings reigned 'till the sixth year of _Xerxes_, in which _Leonidas_
was slain by the _Persians_ at _Thermopylæ_; and _Leutychides_ II. soon
after, flying from _Sparta_ to _Tegea_, died there. The seven Reigns of the
Kings of _Sparta_, which follow _Polydorus_, being added to the ten Reigns
above mentioned, which began with that of _Eurysthenes_; make up seventeen
Reigns of Kings, between the return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_
and the sixth year of _Xerxes_: and the eight Reigns following
_Theopompus_, being added to the nine Reigns above mentioned, which began
with that of _Procles_, make up also seventeen Reigns: and these seventeen
Reigns, at twenty years a-piece one with another, amount unto three hundred
and forty years. Count these 340 years upwards from the sixth year of
_Xerxes_, and one or two years more for the war of the _Heraclides_, and
Reign of _Aristodemus_, the father of _Eurysthenes_ and _Procles_; and they
will place the Return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_, 159 years
after the death of _Solomon_, and 46 years before the first Olympiad, in
which _Coræbus_ was victor. But the followers of _Timæus_ have placed this
Return two hundred and eighty years earlier. Now this being the computation
upon which the _Greeks_, as you have heard from _Diodorus_ and _Plutarch_,
have founded the Chronology of their Kingdoms, which were ancienter than
the _Persian_ Empire; that Chronology is to be rectified, by shortening the
times which preceded the death of _Cyrus_, in the proportion of almost two
to one; for the times which follow the death of _Cyrus_ are not much amiss.

The Artificial Chronologers, have made _Lycurgus_, the legislator, as old
as _Iphitus_, the restorer of the Olympiads; and _Iphitus_, an hundred and
twelve years, older than the first Olympiad: and, to help out the
Hypothesis, they have feigned twenty eight Olympiads older than the first
Olympiad, wherein _Coræbus_ was victor. But these things were feigned,
after the days of _Thucydides_ and _Plato_: for _Socrates_ died three years
after the end of the _Peloponnesian_ war, and _Plato_ [28] introduceth him
saying, that _the institutions of _Lycurgus_ were but of three hundred
years standing, or not much more_. And [29] _Thucydides_, in the reading
followed by _Stephanus_, saith, that _the _Lacedæmonians_, had from ancient
times used good laws, and been free from tyranny; and that from the time
that they had used one and the same administration of their commonwealth,
to the end of the _Peloponnesian_ war, there were three hundred years and a
few more_. Count three hundred years back from the end of the
_Peloponnesian_ war, and they will place the Legislature of _Lycurgus_ upon
the 19th Olympiad. And, according to _Socrates_, it might be upon the 22d
or 23d. _Athenæus_ [30] tells us out of ancient authors (_Hellanicus_,
_Sosimus_ and _Hieronymus_) that _Lycurgus_ the Legislator, was
contemporary to _Terpander_ the Musician; and that _Terpander_ was the
first man who got the victory in the _Carnea_, in a solemnity of music
instituted in those festivals in the 26th Olympiad. He overcame four times
in those _Pythic_ games, and therefore lived at least 'till the 29th
Olympiad: and beginning to flourish in the days of _Lycurgus_, it is not
likely that _Lycurgus_ began to flourish, much before the 18th Olympiad.
The name of _Lycurgus_ being on the Olympic Disc, _Aristotle_ concluded
thence, that _Lycurgus_ was the companion of _Iphitus_, in restoring the
Olympic games: and this argument might be the ground of the opinion of
Chronologers, that _Lycurgus_ and _Iphitus_ were contemporary. But
_Iphitus_ did not restore all the Olympic games. He [31] restored indeed
the Racing in the first Olympiad, _Coræbus_ being victor. In the 14th
Olympiad, the double _stadium_ was added, _Hypænus_ being victor. And in
the 18th Olympiad the _Quinquertium_ and Wrestling were added, _Lampus_ and
_Eurybatus_, two _Spartans_, being victors: And the Disc was one of the
games of the _Quinquertium_. [32] _Pausanias_ tells us that there were
three Discs kept in the Olympic treasury at _Altis_: these therefore having
the name of _Lycurgus_ upon them, shew that they were given by him, at the
institution of the _Quinquertium_, in the 18th Olympiad. Now _Polydectes_
King of _Sparta_, being slain before the birth of his son _Charillus_ or
_Charilaus_, left the Kingdom to _Lycurgus_ his brother; and _Lycurgus_,
upon the birth of _Charillus_, became tutor to the child; and after about
eight months travelled into _Crete_ and _Asia_, till the child grew up, and
brought back with him the poems of _Homer_; and soon after published his
laws, suppose upon the 22d or 23d Olympiad; for he was then growing old:
and _Terpander_ was a Lyric Poet, and began to flourish about this time;
for [33] he imitated _Orpheus_ and _Homer_, and sung _Homer's_ verses and
his own, and wrote the laws of _Lycurgus_ in verse, and was victor in the
_Pythic_ games in the 26th Olympiad, as above. He was the first who
distinguished the modes of Lyric music by several names. _Ardalus_ and
_Clonas_ soon after did the like for wind music: and from henceforward, by
the encouragement of the _Pythic_ games, now instituted, several eminent
Musicians and Poets flourished in _Greece_: as _Archilochus_, _Eumelus
Corinthius_, _Polymnestus_, _Thaletas_, _Xenodemus_, _Xenocritus_,
_Sacadas_, _Tyrtæus_, _Tlesilla_, _Rhianus_, _Alcman_, _Arion_,
_Stesichorus_, _Mimnermnus_, _Alcæus_, _Sappho_, _Theognis_, _Anacreon_,
_Ibycus_, _Simonides_, _Æschylus_, _Pindar_, by whom the Music and Poetry
of the _Greeks_ were brought to perfection.

_Lycurgus_, published his laws in the Reign of _Agesilaus_, the son and
successor of _Doryagus_, in the Race of the Kings of _Sparta_ descended
from _Eurysthenes_. From the Return of the _Heraclides_ into
_Peloponnesus_, to the end of the Reign of _Agesilaus_, there were six
Reigns: and from the same Return to the end of the Reign of _Polydectes_,
in the Race of the _Spartan_ Kings descended from _Procles_, there were
also six Reigns: and these Reigns, at twenty years a-piece one with
another, amount unto 120 years; besides the short Reign of _Aristodemus_,
the father of _Eurysthenes_ and _Procles_, which might amount to a year or
two: for _Aristodemus_ came to the crown, as [34] _Herodotus_ and the
_Lacedæmonians_ themselves affirmed. The times of the deaths of _Agesilaus_
and _Polydectes_ are not certainly known: but it may be presumed that
_Lycurgus_ did not meddle with the Olympic games before he came to the
Kingdom; and therefore _Polydectes_ died in the beginning of the 18th
Olympiad, or but a very little before. If it may be supposed that the 20th
Olympiad was in, or very near to the middle time between the deaths of the
two Kings _Polydectes_ and _Agesilaus_, and from thence be counted upwards
the aforesaid 120 years, and one year more for the Reign of _Aristodemus_;
the reckoning will place the Return of the _Heraclides_, about 45 years
before the beginning of the Olympiads.

_Iphitus_, who restored the Olympic games, [35] was descended from
_Oxylus_, the son of _Hæmon_, the son of _Thoas_, the son of _Andræmon_:
_Hercules_ and _Andræmon_ married two sisters: _Thoas_ warred at _Troy_:
_Oxylus_ returned into _Peloponnesus_ with the _Heraclides_. In this return
he commanded the body of the _Ætolians_, and recovered _Elea_; [36] from
whence his ancestor _Ætolus_, the son of _Endymion_, the son of _Aethlius_,
had been driven by _Salmoneus_ the grandson of _Hellen_. By the friendship
of the _Heraclides_, _Oxylus_ had the care of the Olympic Temple committed
to him: and the _Heraclides_, for his service done them, granted further
upon oath that the country of the _Eleans_ should be free from invasions,
and be defended by them from all armed force: And when the _Eleans_ were
thus consecrated, _Oxylus_ restored the Olympic games: and after they had
been again intermitted, _Iphitus_ their King [37] restored them, and made
them quadrennial. _Iphitus_ is by some reckoned the son of _Hæmon_, by
others the son of _Praxonidas_, the son of _Hæmon_: but _Hæmon_ being the
father of _Oxylus_, I would reckon _Iphitus_ the son of _Praxonidas_, the
son of _Oxylus_, the son of _Hæmon_. And by this reckoning the Return of
the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_ will be two Generations by the eldest
sons, or about 52 years, before the Olympiads.

_Pausanias_ [38] represents that _Melas_ the son of _Antissus_, of the
posterity of _Gonussa_ the daughter of _Sicyon_, was not above six
Generations older than _Cypselus_ King of _Corinth_; and that he was
contemporary to _Aletes_, who returned with the _Heraclides_ into
_Peloponnesus_. The Reign of _Cypselus_ began _An._ 2, Olymp. 31, according
to Chronologers; and six Generations, at about 30 years to a Generation,
amount unto 180 years. Count those years backwards from _An._ 2, Olymp. 31,
and they will place the Return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_ 58
years before the first Olympiad. But it might not be so early, if the Reign
of _Cypselus_ began three or four Olympiads later; for he reigned before
the _Persian_ Empire began.

_Hercules_ the _Argonaut_ was the father of _Hyllus_; the father of
_Cleodius_; the father of _Aristomachus_; the father of _Temenus_,
_Cresphontes_, and _Aristodemus_, who led the _Heraclides_ into
_Peloponnesus_ and _Eurystheus_, who was of the same age with _Hercules_,
was slain in the first attempt of the _Heraclides_ to return: _Hyllus_ was
slain in the second attempt, _Cleodius_ in the third attempt,
_Aristomachus_ in the fourth attempt, and _Aristodemus_ died as soon as
they were returned, and left the Kingdom of _Sparta_ to his sons
_Eurysthenes_ and _Procles_. Whence their Return was four Generations later
than the _Argonautic_ expedition: And these Generations were short ones,
being by the chief of the family, and suit with the reckoning of
_Thucydides_ and the Ancients, that the taking of _Troy_ was about 75 or
eighty years before the return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_; and
the _Argonautic_ expedition one Generation earlier than the taking of
_Troy_. Count therefore eighty years backward from the Return of the
_Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_ to the _Trojan_ war, and the taking of
_Troy_ will be about 76 years after the death of _Solomon_: And the
_Argonautic_ expedition, which was one Generation earlier, will be about 43
years after it. From the taking of _Troy_ to the Return of the
_Heraclides_, could scarce be more than eighty years, because _Orestes_ the
son of _Agamemnon_ was a youth at the taking of _Troy_, and his sons
_Penthilus_ and _Tisamenus_ lived till the Return of the _Heraclides_.

_Æsculapius_ and _Hercules_ were _Argonauts_, and _Hippocrates_ was the
eighteenth inclusively by the father's side from _Æsculapius_, and the
nineteenth from _Hercules_ by the mother's side: and because these
Generations, being taken notice of by writers, were most probably by the
principal of the family, and so for the most part by the eldest sons; we
may reckon about 28 or at the most about 30 years to a Generation. And thus
the seventeen intervals by the father's side, and eighteen by the mother's,
will at a middle reckoning amount unto about 507 years: which counted
backwards from the beginning of the _Peloponnesian_ war, at which time
_Hippocrates_ began to flourish, will reach up to the 43d year after the
death of _Solomon_, and there place the _Argonautic_ expedition.

When the _Romans_ conquered the _Carthaginians_, the Archives of _Carthage_
came into their hands: And thence _Appian_, in his history of the _Punic_
wars, tells in round numbers that _Carthage_ stood seven hundred years: and
[39] _Solinus_ adds the odd number of years in these words: _Adrymeto atque
Carthagini author est a Tyro populus. Urbem istam, ut Cato in Oratione
Senatoria autumat; cum rex Hiarbas rerum in Libya potiretur, Elissa mulier
extruxit, domo Phœnix & Carthadam dixit, quod Phœnicum ore exprimit
civitatem novam; mox sermone verso Carthago dicta est, quæ post annos
septingentos triginta septem exciditur quam fuerat extructa_. _Elissa_ was
_Dido_, and _Carthage_ was destroyed in the Consulship of _Lentulus_ and
_Mummius_, in the year of the _Julian Period_ 4568; from whence count
backwards _737_ years, and the _Encænia_ or Dedication of the City, will
fall upon the 16th year of _Pygmalion_, the brother of _Dido_, and King of
_Tyre_. She fled in the seventh year of _Pygmalion_, but the _Æra_ of the
City began with its _Encænia_. Now _Virgil_, and his Scholiast _Servius_,
who might have some things from the archives of _Tyre_ and _Cyprus_, as
well as from those of _Carthage_, relate that _Teucer_ came from the war of
_Troy_ to _Cyprus_, in the days of _Dido_, a little before the Reign of her
brother _Pygmalion_; and, in conjunction with her father, seized _Cyprus_,
and ejected _Cinyras_: and the Marbles say that _Teucer_ came to _Cyprus_
seven years after the destruction of _Troy_, and built _Salamis_; and
_Apollodorus_, that _Cinyras_ married _Metharme_ the daughter of
_Pygmalion_, and built _Paphos_. Therefore, if the _Romans_, in the days of
_Augustus_, followed not altogether the artificial Chronology of
_Eratosthenes_, but had these things from the records of _Carthage_,
_Cyprus_, or _Tyre_; the arrival of _Teucer_ at _Cyprus_ will be in the
Reign of the predecessor of _Pygmalion_: and by consequence the destruction
of _Troy_, about 76 years later than the death of _Solomon_.

_Dionysius Halicarnassensis_ [40] tells us, that in the time of the
_Trojan_ war, _Latinus_ was King of the _Aborigines_ in _Italy_, and that
in the sixteenth Age after that war, _Romulus_ built _Rome_. By Ages he
means Reigns of Kings: for after _Latinus_ he names sixteen Kings of the
_Latines_, the last of which was _Numitor_, in whose days _Romulus_ built
_Rome_: for _Romulus_ was contemporary to _Numitor_, and after him
_Dionysius_ and others reckon six Kings more over _Rome_, to the beginning
of the Consuls. Now these twenty and two Reigns, at about 18 years to a
Reign one with another, for many of these Kings were slain, took up 396
years; which counted back from the consulship of _Junius Brutus_ and
_Valerius Publicola_, the two first Consuls, place the _Trojan_ war about
78 years after the death of _Solomon_.

The expedition of _Sesostris_ was one Generation earlier than the
_Argonautic_ expedition: for in his return back into _Egypt_ he left
_Æetes_ in _Colchis_, and _Æetes_ reigned there 'till the _Argonautic_
expedition; and _Prometheus_ was left by _Sesostris_ with a body of men at
_Mount Caucasus_, to guard that pass, and after thirty years was released
by _Hercules_ the _Argonaut_: and _Phlyas_ and _Eumedon_, the sons of the
great _Bacchus_, so the Poets call _Sesostris_, and of _Ariadne_ the
daughter of _Minos_, were _Argonauts_. At the return of _Sesostris_ into
_Egypt_, his brother _Danaus_ fled from him into _Greece_ with his fifty
daughters, in a long ship; after the pattern of which the ship _Argo_ was
built: and _Argus_, the son of _Danaus_, was the master-builder thereof.
_Nauplius_ the _Argonaut_ was born in _Greece_, of _Amymone_, one of the
daughters of _Danaus_, and of _Neptune_, the brother and admiral of
_Sesostris_: And two others of the daughters of _Danaus_ married
_Archander_ and _Archilites_, the sons of _Achæus_, the son of _Creusa_,
the daughter of _Erechtheus_ King of _Athens_: and therefore the daughters
of _Danaus_ were three Generations younger than _Erechtheus_; and by
consequence contemporary to _Theseus_ the son of _Ægeus_, the adopted son
of _Pandion_, the son of _Erechtheus_. _Theseus_, in the time of the
_Argonautic_ expedition, was of about 50 years of age, and so was born
about the 33d year of _Solomon_: for he stole _Helena_ [41] just before
that expedition, being then 50 years old, and she but seven, or as some say
ten. _Pirithous_ the son of _Ixion_ helped _Theseus_ to steal _Helena_, and
then [42] _Theseus_ went with _Pirithous_ to steal _Persephone_, the
daughter of _Aidoneus_, or _Orcus_, King of the _Molossians_, and was taken
in the action: and whilst he lay in prison, _Castor_ and _Pollux_ returning
from the _Argonautic_ expedition, released their sister _Helena_, and
captivated _Æthra_ the mother of _Theseus_. Now the daughters of _Danaus_
being contemporary to _Theseus_, and some of their sons being _Argonauts_,
_Danaus_ with his daughters fled from his brother _Sesostris_ into _Greece_
about one Generation before the _Argonautic_ expedition; and therefore
_Sesostris_ returned into _Egypt_ in the Reign of _Rehoboam_. He came out
of _Egypt_ in the fifth year of _Rehoboam_, [43] and spent nine years in
that expedition, against the Eastern Nations and _Greece_; and therefore
returned back into _Egypt_, in the fourteenth year of _Rehoboam_. _Sesac_
and _Sesostris_ were therefore Kings of all _Egypt_, at one and the same
time: and they agree not only in the time, but also in their actions and
conquests. God gave _Sesac_ ממלכות הארצות _the Kingdoms of the lands_, 2
Chron. xii. Where _Herodotus_ describes the expedition of _Sesostris_,
_Josephus_ [44] tells us that he described the expedition of _Sesac_, and
attributed his actions to _Sesostris_, erring only in the name of the King.
Corruptions of names are frequent in history; _Sesostris_ was otherwise
called _Sesochris_, _Sesochis_, _Sesoosis_, _Sethosis_, _Sesonchis_,
_Sesonchosis_. Take away the _Greek_ termination, and the names become
_Sesost_, _Sesoch_, _Sesoos_, _Sethos_, _Sesonch_: which names differ very
little from _Sesach_. _Sesonchis_ and _Sesach_ differ no more than
_Memphis_ and _Moph_, two names of the same city. _Josephus_ [45] tells us
also, from _Manetho_, that _Sethosis_ was the brother of _Armais_, and that
these brothers were otherwise called _Ægyptus_ and _Danaus_; and that upon
the return of _Sethosis_ or _Ægyptus_, from his great conquests into
_Egypt_, _Armais_ or _Danaus_ fled from him into _Greece_.

_Egypt_ was at first divided into many small Kingdoms, like other nations;
and grew into one monarchy by degrees: and the father of _Solomon's_ Queen,
was the first King of _Egypt_, who came into _Phœnicia_ with an Army: but
he only took _Gezir_, and gave it to his daughter. _Sesac_, the next King,
came out of _Egypt_ with an army of _Libyans_, _Troglodites_ and
_Ethiopians_, 2 Chron. xii. 3. and therefore was then King of all those
countries; and we do not read in Scripture, that any former King of
_Egypt_; who Reigned over all those nations, came out of _Egypt_ with a
great army to conquer other countries. The sacred history of the
_Israelites_, from the days of _Abraham_ to the days of _Solomon_, admits
of no such conqueror. _Sesostris_ reigned over all the same nations of the
_Libyans_, _Troglodites_ and _Ethiopians_, and came out of _Egypt_ with a
great army to conquer other Kingdoms. The Shepherds reigned long in the
lower part of _Egypt_, and were expelled thence, just before the building
of _Jerusalem_ and the Temple; according to _Manetho_; and whilst they
Reigned in the lower part of _Egypt_, the upper part thereof was under
other Kings: and while _Egypt_ was divided into several Kingdoms, there was
no room for any such King of all _Egypt_ as _Sesostris_; and no historian
makes him later than _Sesac_: and therefore he was one and the same King of
_Egypt_ with _Sesac_. This is no new opinion: _Josephus_ discovered it when
he affirmed that _Herodotus_ erred, in ascribing the actions of _Sesac_ to
_Sesostris_, and that the error was only in the name of the King: for this
is as much as to say, that the true name of him who did those things
described by _Herodotus_, was _Sesac_; and that _Herodotus_ erred only in
calling him _Sesostris_; or that he was called _Sesostris_ by a corruption
of his name. Our great Chronologer, _Sir John Marsham_, was also of opinion
that _Sesostris_ was _Sesac_: and if this be granted, it is then most
certain, that _Sesostris_ came out of _Egypt_ in the fifth year of
_Rehoboam_ to invade the nations, and returned back into _Egypt_ in the
14th year of that King; and that _Danaus_ then flying from his brother,
came into _Greece_ within a year or two after: and the _Argonautic_
expedition being one Generation later than that invasion, and than the
coming of _Danaus_ into _Greece_, was certainly about 40 or 45 years later
than the death of _Solomon_. _Prometheus_ stay'd on _Mount Caucasus_ [46]
thirty years, and then was released by _Hercules_: and therefore the
_Argonautic_ expedition was thirty years after _Prometheus_ had been left
on _Mount Caucasus_ by _Sesostris_, that is, about 44 years after the death
of _Solomon_.

All nations, before the just length of the Solar year was known, reckoned
months by the course of the moon; and years by the [47] returns of winter
and summer, spring and autumn: and in making Calendars for their Festivals,
reckoned thirty days to a Lunar month, and twelve Lunar months to a year;
taking the nearest round numbers: whence came the division of the Ecliptic
into 360 degrees. So in the time of _Noah_'s flood, when the Moon could not
be seen, _Noah_ reckoned thirty days to a month: but if the Moon appeared a
day or two before the end of the month, [48] they began the next month with
the first day of her appearing: and this was done generally, 'till the
_Egyptians_ of _Thebais_ found the length of the Solar year. So [49]
_Diodorus_ tells us that _the _Egyptians_ of _Thebais_ use no intercalary
months, nor subduct any days_ [from the month] _as is done by most of the
_Greeks__. And [50] _Cicero_, _est consuetudo Siculorum cæterorumque
Græcorum, quod suos dies mensesque congruere volunt cum Solis Lunæque
ratione, ut nonnumquam siquid discrepet, eximant unum aliquem diem aut
summum biduum ex mense_ [civili dierum triginta] _quos illi_ εξαιρεσιμους
_dies nominant_. And _Proclus_, upon _Hesiod_'s τριακας mentions the same
thing. And [51] _Geminus_: Προθεσις γαρ ην τοις αρχαιοις, τους μεν μηνας
αγειν κατα σεληνην, τους δε ενιαυτους καθ' ‛ηλιον. Το γαρ ‛υπο των νομων,
και των χρησμων παραγγελλομενον, το θυειν κατα γ', ηγουν τα πατρια, μηνας,
‛ημερας, ενιαυτους: τουτο διελαβον απαντες ‛οι ‛Ελληνες τωι τους μεν
‛ενιαυτους συμφωνως αγειν τωι ‛ηλιωι· τας δε ‛ημερας και τους μηνας τηι
σεληνη. εστι δε το μεν καθ' ‛ηλιον αγειν τους ενιαυτους, το περι τας αυτας
‛ωρας του ενιαυτου τας αυτας θυσιας τοις θεοις επιτελειθαι, και την μεν
εαρινην θυσιαν δια παντος κατα το εαρ συντελειθαι· την δε θερινην, κατα το
θερος· ‛ομοιως δε και κατα τους λοιπους καιρους του ετους τας αυτας θυσιας
πιπτειν. Τουτο γαρ ‛υπελαβον προσηνες, και κεχαρισμενον ειναι τοις θεοις.
Τουτο δ' αλλως ουκ αν δυναιτο γενεσθαι, ει μη ‛αι τροπαι, και ‛αι ισημεριαι
περι τους αυτους τοπους γιγνοιντο. Το δε κατα σεληνην αγειν τας ‛ημερας,
τοιουτον εστι· το ακολουθως τοις της σεληνης φωτισμοις τας προσηγοριας των
‛ημερων γινεσθαι. απο γαρ των της σεληνης φωτισμων ‛αι προσηγοριαι των
‛ημερων κατωνομασθησαν. Εν ‛ηι μεν γαρ ‛ημεραι νεα ‛η σεληνη φαινεται, κατα
συναλοιφην νεομηνια προσηγορευθη· εν ‛ηι δε ‛ημεραι την δευτεραν φασιν
ποιειται, δευτεραν προσηγορευσαν· την δε κατα μεσον του μηνος γινομενην
φασιν της σεληνης, απο αυτου του συμβαινοντος διχομηνιαν εκαλεσαν. και
καθολου δε πασας τας ‛ημερας απο των της σεληνης φωτισματων προσωνομασαν.
‛οθεν και την τριακοστην του μηνος ‛ημεραν εσχατην ουσαν απο αυτου του
συμβαινοντος τριακαδα εκαλεσαν. _Propositum enim fuit veteribus, menses
quidem agere secundum Lunam, annos vero secundum Solem. Quod enim a legibus
& Oraculis præcipiebatur, ut sacrificarent secundum tria, videlicet patria,
menses, dies, annos; hoc ita distincte faciebant universi Græci, ut annos
agerent congruenter cum Sole, dies vero & menses cum Luna. Porro secundum
Solem annos agere, est circa easdem tempestates anni eadem sacrificia Diis
perfici, & vernum sacrificium semper in vere consummari, æstivum autem in
æstate: similiter & in reliquis anni temporibus eadem sacrificia cadere.
Hoc enim putabant acceptum & gratum esse Diis. Hoc autem aliter fieri non
posset nisi conversiones solstitiales & æquinoctia in iisdem Zodiaci locis
fierent. Secundum Lunam vero dies agere est tale ut congruant cum Lunæ
illuminationibus appellationes dierum. Nam a Lunæ illuminationibus
appellationes dierum sunt denominatæ. In qua enim die Luna apparet nova, ea
per Synalœphen, seu compositionem νεομηνια id est, Novilunium appellatur.
In qua vero die secundam facit apparitionem, eam secundam Lunam vocarunt.
Apparitionem Lunæ quæ circa medium mensis fit, ab ipso eventu διχομηνιαν,
id est medietatem mensis nominarunt. Ac summatim, omnes dies a Lunæ
illuminationibus denominarunt. Unde etiam tricesimam mensis diem, cum
ultima sit, ab ipso eventu τριακαδα vocarunt_.

The ancient Calendar year of the _Greeks_ consisted therefore of twelve
Lunar months, and every month of thirty days: and these years and months
they corrected from time to time, by the courses of the Sun and Moon,
omitting a day or two in the month, as often as they found the month too
long for the course of the Moon; and adding a month to the year, as often
as they found the twelve Lunar months too short for the return of the four
seasons. _Cleobulus_, [52] one of the seven wise men of _Greece_, alluded
to this year of the _Greeks_, in his Parable of one father who had twelve
sons, each of which had thirty daughters half white and half black: and
_Thales_ [53] called the last day of the month τριακαδα, the thirtieth: and
_Solon_ counted the ten last days of the month backward from the thirtieth,
calling that day ενην και νεαν, the old and the new, or the last day of the
old month and the first day of the new: for he introduced months of 29 and
30 days alternately, making the thirtieth day of every other month to be
the first day of the next month.

To the twelve Lunar months [54] the ancient _Greeks_ added a thirteenth,
every other year, which made their _Dieteris_; and because this reckoning
made their year too long by a month in eight years, they omitted an
intercalary month once in eight years, which made their _Octaeteris_, one
half of which was their _Tetraeteris_: And these Periods seem to have been
almost as old as the religions of _Greece_, being used in divers of their
_Sacra_. The [55] _Octaeteris_ was the _Annus magnus_ of _Cadmus_ and
_Minos_, and seems to have been brought into _Greece_ and _Crete_ by the
_Phœnicians_, who came thither with _Cadmus_ and _Europa_, and to have
continued 'till after the days of _Herodotus_: for in counting the length
of seventy years [56], he reckons thirty days to a Lunar month, and twelve
such months, or 360 days, to the ordinary year, without the intercalary
months, and 25 such months to the _Dieteris_: and according to the number
of days in the Calendar year of the _Greeks_, _Demetrius Phalereus_ had 360
Statues erected to him by the _Athenians_. But the _Greeks_, _Cleostratus_,
_Harpalus_, and others, to make their months agree better with the course
of the Moon, in the times of the _Persian_ Empire, varied the manner of
intercaling the three months in the _Octaeteris_; and _Meton_ found out the
Cycle of intercaling seven months in nineteen years.

The Ancient year of the _Latines_ was also Luni-solar; for _Plutarch_ [57]
tells us, that the year of _Numa_ consisted of twelve Lunar months, with
intercalary months to make up what the twelve Lunar months wanted of the
Solar year. The Ancient year of the _Egyptians_ was also Luni-solar, and
continued to be so 'till the days of _Hyperion_, or _Osiris_, a King of
_Egypt_, the father of _Helius_ and _Selene_, or _Orus_ and _Bubaste_: For
the _Israelites_ brought this year out of _Egypt_; and _Diodorus_ tells
[58] us that _Ouranus_ the father of _Hyperion_ used this year, and [59]
that in the Temple of _Osiris_ the Priests appointed thereunto filled 360
Milk Bowls every day: I think he means one Bowl every day, in all 360, to
count the number of days in the Calendar year, and thereby to find out the
difference between this and the true Solar year: for the year of 360 days
was the year, to the end of which they added five days.

That the _Israelites_ used the Luni-solar year is beyond question. Their
months began with their new Moons. Their first month was called _Abib_,
from the earing of Corn in that month. Their Passover was kept upon the
fourteenth day of the first month, the Moon being then in the full: and if
the Corn was not then ripe enough for offering the first Fruits, the
Festival was put off, by adding an intercalary month to the end of the
year; and the harvest was got in before the Pentecost, and the other Fruits
gathered before the Feast of the seventh month.

_Simplicius_ in his commentary [60] on the first of _Aristotle_'s _Physical
Acroasis_, tells us, that _some begin the year upon the Summer Solstice, as
the People of _Attica_; or upon the Autumnal Equinox, as the People of
_Asia_; or in Winter, as the _Romans_; or about the Vernal Equinox, as the
_Arabians_ and People of _Damascus_: and the month began, according to
some, upon the Full Moon, or upon the New._ The years of all these Nations
were therefore Luni-solar, and kept to the four Seasons: and the _Roman_
year began at first in Spring, as I seem to gather from the Names of their
Months, _Quintilis_, _Sextilis_, _September_, _October_, _November_,
_December_: and the beginning was afterwards removed to Winter. The ancient
civil year of the _Assyrians_ and _Babylonians_ was also Luni-solar: for
this year was also used by the _Samaritans_, who came from several parts of
the _Assyrian_ Empire; and the _Jews_ who came from _Babylon_ called the
months of their Luni-solar year after the Names of the months of the
_Babylonian_ year: and _Berosus_ [61] tells us that the _Babylonians_
celebrated the Feast _Sacæa_ upon the 16th day of the month _Lous_, which
was a Lunar month of the _Macedonians_, and kept to one and the same Season
of the year: and the _Arabians_, a Nation who peopled _Babylon_, use Lunar
months to this day. _Suidas_ [62] tells us, that the _Sarus_ of the
_Chaldeans_ contains 222 Lunar months, which are eighteen years, consisting
each of twelve Lunar months, besides six intercalary months: and when [63]
_Cyrus_ cut the River _Gindus_ into 360 Channels, he seems to have alluded
unto the number of days in the Calendar year of the _Medes_ and _Persians_:
and the Emperor _Julian_ [64] writes, _For when all other People, that I
may say it in one word, accommodate their months to the course of the Moon,
we alone with the _Egyptians_ measure the days of the year by the course of
the Sun._

At length the _Egyptians_, for the sake of Navigation, applied themselves
to observe the Stars; and by their Heliacal Risings and Settings found the
true Solar year to be five days longer than the Calendar year, and
therefore added five days to the twelve Calendar months; making the Solar
year to consist of twelve months and five days. _Strabo_ [65] and [66]
_Diodorus_ ascribe this invention to the _Egyptians_ of _Thebes_. _The
_Theban_ Priests_, saith _Strabo_, _are above others said to be Astronomers
and Philosophers. They invented the reckoning of days not by the course of
the Moon, but by the course of the Sun. To twelve months each of thirty
days they add yearly five days._ In memory of this Emendation of the year
they dedicated the [67] five additional days to _Osiris_, _Isis_, _Orus_
senior, _Typhon_, and _Nephthe_ the wife of _Typhon_, feigning that those
days were added to the year when these five Princes were born, that is, in
the Reign of _Ouranus_, or _Ammon_, the father of _Sesac_: and in [68] the
Sepulchre of _Amenophis_, who Reigned soon after, they placed a Golden
Circle of 365 cubits in compass, and divided it into 365 equal parts, to
represent all the days in the year, and noted upon each part the Heliacal
Risings and Settings of the Stars on that day; which Circle remained there
'till the invasion of _Egypt_ by _Cambyses_ King of _Persia_. 'Till the
Reign of _Ouranus_, the father of _Hyperion_, and grandfather of _Helius_
and _Selene_, the _Egyptians_ used the old Lunisolar year: but in his
Reign, that is, in the Reign of _Ammon_, the father of _Osiris_ or _Sesac_,
and grandfather of _Orus_ and _Bubaste_, the _Thebans_ began to apply
themselves to Navigation and Astronomy, and by the Heliacal Risings and
Settings of the Stars determined the length of the Solar year; and to the
old Calendar year added five days, and dedicated them to his five children
above mentioned, as their birth days: and in the Reign of _Amenophis_, when
by further Observations they had sufficiently determined the time of the
Solstices, they might place the beginning of this new year upon the Vernal
Equinox. This year being at length propagated into _Chaldæa_, gave occasion
to the year of _Nabonassar_; for the years of _Nabonassar_ and those of
_Egypt_ began on one and the same day, called by them _Thoth_, and were
equal and in all respects the same: and the first year of _Nabonassar_
began on the 26th day of _February_ of the old _Roman_ year, seven hundred
forty and seven years before the Vulgar _Æra_ of _Christ_, and thirty and
three days and five hours before the Vernal Equinox, according to the Sun's
mean motion; for it is not likely that the Equation of the Sun's motion
should be known in the infancy of Astronomy. Now reckoning that the year of
365 days wants five hours and 49 minutes of the Equinoctial year; the
beginning of this year will move backwards thirty and three days and five
hours in 137 years: and by consequence this year began at first in _Egypt_
upon the Vernal Equinox, according to the Sun's mean motion, 137 years
before the _Æra_ of _Nabonassar_ began; that is, in the year of the
_Julian_ Period 3830, or 96 years after the death of _Solomon_: and if it
began upon the next day after the Vernal Equinox, it might begin four years
earlier; and about that time ended the Reign of _Amenophis_: for he came
not from _Susa_ to the _Trojan_ war, but died afterwards in _Egypt_. This
year was received by the _Persian_ Empire from the _Babylonian_; and the
_Greeks_ also used it in the _Æra Philippæa_, dated from the Death of
_Alexander_ the great; and _Julius Cæsar_ corrected it, by adding a day in
every four years, and made it the year of the _Romans_.

_Syncellus_ tells us, that the five days were added to the old year by the
last King of the Shepherds: and the difference in time between the Reign of
this King, and that of _Ammon_, is but small; for the Reign of the
Shepherds ended but one Generation, or two, before _Ammon_ began to add
those days. But the Shepherds minded not Arts and Sciences.

The first month of the Luni-solar year, by reason of the Intercalary month,
began sometimes a week or a fortnight before the Equinox or Solstice, and
sometimes as much after it. And this year gave occasion to the first
Astronomers, who formed the _Asterisms_, to place the Equinoxes and
Solstices in the middles of the Constellations of _Aries_, _Cancer_,
_Chelæ_, and _Capricorn_. _Achilles Tatius_ [69] tells us, that _some
antiently placed the Solstice in the beginning of _Cancer_, others in the
eighth degree of _Cancer_, others about the twelfth degree, and others
about the fifteenth degree thereof._ This variety of opinions proceeded
from the precession of the Equinox, then not known to the _Greeks_. When
the Sphere was first formed, the Solstice was in the fifteenth degree or
middle of the Constellation of _Cancer_: then it came into the twelfth,
eighth, fourth, and first degree successively. _Eudoxus_, who flourished
about sixty years after _Meton_, and an hundred years before _Aratus_, in
describing the Sphere of the Ancients, placed the Solstices and Equinoxes
in the middles of the Constellations of _Aries_, _Cancer_, _Chelæ_, and
_Capricorn_, as is affirmed by [70] _Hipparchus Bithynus_; and appears also
by the Description of the Equinoctial and Tropical Circles in _Aratus_,
[71] who copied after _Eudoxus_; and by the positions of the _Colures_ of
the Equinoxes and Solstices, which in the Sphere of _Eudoxus_, described by
_Hipparchus_, went through the middles of those Constellations. For
_Hipparchus_ tells us, that _Eudoxus_ drew the _Colure_ of the Solstices,
through the middle of the _great Bear_, and the middle of _Cancer_, and the
neck of _Hydrus_, and the Star between the Poop and Mast of _Argo_, and the
Tayl of the _South Fish_, and through the middle of _Capricorn_, and of
_Sagitta_, and through the neck and right wing of the _Swan_, and the left
hand of _Cepheus_; and that he drew the Equinoctial _Colure_, through the
left hand of _Arctophylax_, and along the middle of his Body, and cross the
middle of _Chelæ_, and through the right hand and fore-knee of the
_Centaur_, and through the flexure of _Eridanus_ and head of _Cetus_, and
the back of _Aries_ a-cross, and through the head and right hand of
_Perseus_.

Now _Chiron_ delineated σχηματα ολυμπου the _Asterisms_, as the ancient
Author of _Gigantomachia_, cited by [72] _Clemens Alexandrinus_ informs us:
for _Chiron_ was a practical Astronomer, as may be there understood also of
his daughter _Hippo_: and _Musæus_, the son of _Eumolpus_ and master of
_Orpheus_, and one of the _Argonauts_, [73] made a Sphere, and is reputed
the first among the _Greeks_ who made one: and the Sphere it self shews
that it was delineated in the time of the _Argonautic_ expedition; for that
expedition is delineated in the _Asterisms_, together with several other
ancienter Histories of the _Greeks_, and without any thing later. There's
the golden _RAM_, the ensign of the Vessel in which _Phryxus_ fled to
_Colchis_; the _BULL_ with brazen hoofs tamed by _Jason_; and the _TWINS_,
_CASTOR_ and _POLLUX_, two of the _Argonauts_, with the _SWAN_ of _Leda_
their mother. There's the Ship _ARGO_, and _HYDRUS_ the watchful Dragon;
with _Medea_'s _CUP_, and a _RAVEN_ upon its Carcass, the Symbol of Death.
There's _CHIRON_ the master of _Jason_, with his _ALTAR_ and _SACRIFICE_.
There's the _Argonaut_ _HERCULES_ with his _DART_ and _VULTURE_ falling
down; and the _DRAGON_, _CRAB_ and _LION_, whom he slew; and the _HARP_ of
the _Argonaut_ _Orpheus_. All these relate to the _Argonauts_. There's
_ORION_ the son of _Neptune_, or as some say, the grandson of _Minos_, with
his _DOGS_, and _HARE_, and _RIVER_, and _SCORPION_. There's the story of
_Perseus_ in the Constellations of _PERSEUS_, _ANDROMEDA_, _CEPHEUS_,
_CASSIOPEA_ and _CETUS_: That of _Callisto_, and her son _Arcas_, in _URSA
MAJOR_ and _ARCTOPHYLAX_: That of _Icareus_ and his daughter _Erigone_ in
_BOOTES_, _PLAUSTRUM_ and _VIRGO_. _URSA MINOR_ relates to one of the
Nurses of _Jupiter_, _AURIGA_ to _Erechthonius_, _OPHIUCHUS_ to _Phorbas_,
_SAGITTARIUS_ to _Crolus_ the son of the Nurse of the Muses, _CAPRICORN_ to
_Pan_, and _AQUARIUS_ to _Ganimede_. There's _Ariadne_'s _CROWN_,
_Bellerophon_'s _HORSE_, _Neptune_'s _DOLPHIN_, _Ganimede_'s _EAGLE_,
_Jupiter_'s _GOAT_ with her _KIDS_, _Bacchus_'s _ASSES_, and the _FISHES_
of _Venus_ and _Cupid_, and their Parent the _SOUTH FISH_. These with
_DELTOTON_, are the old Constellations mentioned by _Aratus_: and they all
relate to the _Argonauts_ and their Contemporaries, and to Persons one or
two Generations older: and nothing later than that Expedition was
delineated there Originally. _ANTINOUS_ and _COMA BERENICES_ are novel. The
Sphere seems therefore to have been formed by _Chiron_ and _Musæus_, for
the use of the _Argonauts_: for the Ship _Argo_ was the first long ship
built by the _Greeks_. Hitherto they had used round vessels of burden, and
kept within sight of the shore; and now, upon an Embassy to several Princes
upon the coasts of the _Euxine_ and _Mediterranean_ Seas, [74] by the
dictates of the Oracle, and consent of the Princes of _Greece_, the Flower
of _Greece_ were to sail with Expedition through the deep, in a long Ship
with Sails, and guide their Ship by the Stars. The People of the Island
_Corcyra_ [75] attributed the invention of the Sphere to _Nausicaa_, the
daughter of _Alcinous_, King of the _Pheaces_ in that Island: and it's most
probable that she had it from the _Argonauts_, who [76] in their return
home sailed to that Island, and made some stay there with her father. So
then in the time of the _Argonautic_ Expedition, the Cardinal points of the
Equinoxes and Solstices were in the middles of the Constellations of
_Aries_, _Cancer_, _Chelæ_, and _Capricorn_.

In the end of the year of our Lord 1689 the Star called _Prima Arietis_ was
in [Aries]. 28°. 51'. 00", with North Latitude 7°. 8'. 58". And the Star
called _ultima caudæ Arietis_ was in [Taurus]. 19°. 3'. 42", with North
Latitude 2°. 34'. 5". And the _Colurus Æquinoctiorum_ passing through the
point in the middle between those two Stars did then cut the Ecliptic in
[Taurus]. 6°. 44': and by this reckoning the Equinox in the end of the year
1689 was gone back 36°. 44'. since the _Argonautic_ Expedition: Supposing
that the said _Colure_ passed through the middle of the Constellation of
_Aries_, according to the delineation of the Ancients. The Equinox goes
back fifty seconds in one year, and one degree in seventy and two years,
and by consequence 36°. 44'. in 2645 years, which counted back from the end
of the year of our Lord 1689, or beginning of the year 1690, will place the
_Argonautic_ Expedition about 25 years after the Death of _Solomon_: but it
is not necessary that the middle of the Constellation of _Aries_ should be
exactly in the middle between the two Stars called _prima Arietis_ and
_ultima Caudæ_: and it may be better to fix the Cardinal points by the
Stars, through which the _Colures_ passed in the primitive Sphere,
according to the description of _Eudoxus_ above recited. By the _Colure_ of
the Equinoxes, I mean a great Circle passing through the Poles of the
Equator, and cutting the Ecliptic in the Equinoxes in an Angle of 66½
degrees, the complement of the Sun's greatest Declination; and by the
_Colure_ of the Solstices I mean a great Circle passing through the same
Poles, and cutting the Ecliptic at right Angles in the Solstices: and by
the Primitive Sphere, that which was in use before the motions of the
Equinoxes and Solstices were known: now the _Colures_ passed through the
following Stars according to _Eudoxus_.

In the back of _Aries_ is a Star of the sixth magnitude, marked ν by
_Bayer_: in the end of the year 1689, and beginning of the year 1690, its
Longitude was [Taurus]. 9°. 38'. 45", and North Latitude 6°. 7'. 56": and
the _Colurus Æquinoctiorum_ drawn though it, according to _Eudoxus_, cuts
the Ecliptic in [Taurus]. 6°. 58'. 57". In the head of _Cetus_ are two
Stars of the fourth Magnitude, called ν and ξ by _Bayer_: in the end of the
year 1689 their Longitudes were [Taurus]. 4°. 3'. 9". and [Taurus]. 3°. 7'.
37", and their South Latitudes 9°. 12'. 26". and 5°. 53'. 7"; and the
_Colurus Æquinoctiorum_ passing in the mid way between them, cuts the
Ecliptic in [Taurus]. 6°. 58'. 51". In the extreme flexure of _Eridanus_,
rightly delineated, is a Star of the fourth Magnitude, of late referred to
the breast of _Cetus_, and called ρ by _Bayer_; it is the only Star in
_Eridanus_ through which this _Colure_ can pass; its Longitude, in the end
of the year 1689, was [Aries]. 25°. 22'. 10". and South Latitude 25°. 15'.
50". and the _Colurus Æquinoctiorum_ passing through it, cuts the Ecliptic
in [Taurus]. 7°. 12'. 40". In the head of _Perseus_, rightly delineated, is
a Star of the fourth Magnitude, called τ by _Bayer_; the Longitude of this
Star, in the end of the year 1689, was [Taurus]. 23°. 25'. 30", and North
Latitude 34°. 20'. 12": and the _Colurus Æquinoctiorum_ passing through it,
cuts the Ecliptic in [Taurus]. 6°. 18'. 57". In the right hand of
_Perseus_, rightly delineated, is a Star of the fourth Magnitude, called η
by _Bayer_; its Longitude in the end of the year 1689, was [Taurus]. 24°.
25'. 27", and North Latitude 37°. 26'. 50": and the _Colurus Æquinoctiorum_
passing through it cuts the Ecliptic in [Taurus]. 4°. 56'. 40": and the
fifth part of the summ of the places in which these five _Colures_ cut the
Ecliptic, is [Taurus]. 6°. 29'. 15": and therefore the Great Circle which
in the Primitive Sphere according to _Eudoxus_, and by consequence in the
time of the _Argonautic_ Expedition, was the _Colurus Æquinoctiorum_
passing through the Stars above described; did in the end of the year 1689,
cut the Ecliptic in [Taurus]. 6°. 29'. 15": as nearly as we have been able
to determin by the Observations of the Ancients, which were but coarse.

In the middle of _Cancer_ is the _South Asellus_, a Star of the fourth
Magnitude, called by _Bayer_ δ; its Longitude in the end of the year 1689,
was [Leo]. 4°. 23'. 40". In the neck of _Hydrus_, rightly delineated, is a
Star of the fourth Magnitude, called δ by _Bayer_; its Longitude in the end
of the year 1689, was [Leo]. 5°. 59'. 3". Between the poop and mast of the
Ship _Argo_ is a Star of the third Magnitude, called ι by _Bayer_; its
Longitude in the end of that year, was [Leo]. 7°. 5'. 31". In _Sagitta_ is
a Star of the sixth Magnitude, called θ by _Bayer_; its Longitude in the
end of the same year 1689, was [Aquarius]. 6°. 29'. 53". In the middle of
_Capricorn_ is a Star of the fifth Magnitude, called η by _Bayer_; its
Longitude in the end of the same year was [Aquarius]. 8°. 25'. 55": and the
fifth part of the summ of the three first Longitudes, and of the
complements of the two last to 180 Degrees; is [Leo]. 6°. 28'. 46". This is
the new Longitude of the old _Colurus Solstitiorum_ passing through these
Stars. The same _Colurus_ passes also in the middle between the Stars η and
κ, of the fourth and fifth Magnitudes, in the neck of the _Swan_; being
distant from each about a Degree: it passeth also by the Star κ, of the
fourth Magnitude, in the right wing of the _Swan_; and by the Star ο, of
the fifth Magnitude, in the left hand of _Cepheus_, rightly delineated; and
by the Stars in the tail of the _South-Fish_; and is at right angles with
the _Colurus Æquinoctiorum_ found above: and so it hath all the characters,
of the _Colurus Solstitiorum_ rightly drawn.

The two _Colures_ therefore, which in the time of the _Argonautic_
Expedition cut the Ecliptic in the Cardinal Points, did in the end of the
year 1689 cut it in [Taurus]. 6°. 29'; [Leo]. 6°. 29'; [Scorpio]. 6°. 29';
and [Aquarius]. 6°. 29'; that is, at the distance of 1 Sign, 6 Degrees and
29 Minutes from the Cardinal Points of _Chiron_; as nearly as we have been
able to determin from the coarse observations of the Ancients: and
therefore the Cardinal Points, in the time between that Expedition and the
end of the year 1689, have gone back from those _Colures_ one Sign, 6
Degrees and 29 Minutes; which, after the rate of 72 years to a Degree,
answers to 2627 years. Count those years backwards from the end of the year
1689, or beginning of the year 1690, and the reckoning will place the
_Argonautic_ Expedition, about 43 years after the death of _Solomon_.

By the same method the place of any Star in the Primitive Sphere may
readily be found, counting backwards one Sign, 6°. 29'. from the Longitude
which it had in the end of the year of our Lord 1689. So the Longitude of
the first Star of _Aries_ in the end of the year 1689 was [Aries]. 28°.
51'. as above: count backward 1 Sign, 6°. 29'. and its Longitude, counted
from the Equinox in the middle of the Constellation of _Aries_, in the time
of the _Argonautic_ expedition, will be [Pisces]. 22°. 22': and by the same
way of arguing, the Longitude of the _Lucida Pleiadum_ in the time of the
_Argonautic_ Expedition will be [Aries]. 19°. 26'. 8": and the Longitude of
_Arcturus_ [Virgo]. 13°. 24'. 52": and so of any other Stars.

After the _Argonautic_ Expedition we hear no more of Astronomy 'till the
days of _Thales_: He [77] revived Astronomy, and wrote a book of the
Tropics and Equinoxes, and predicted Eclipses; and _Pliny_ [78] tells us,
that he determined the _Occasus Matutinus_ of the _Pleiades_ to be upon the
25th day after the Autumnal Equinox: and thence [79] _Petavius_ computes
the Longitude of the _Pleiades_ in [Aries]. 23°. 53': and by consequence
the _Lucida Pleiadum_ had, since the _Argonautic_ Expedition, moved from
the Equinox 4°. 26'. 52": and this motion, after the rate of 72 years to a
Degree, answers to 320 years: count these years back from the time in which
_Thales_ was a young man fit to apply himself to Astronomical Studies, that
is from about the 41st Olympiad, and the reckoning will place the
_Argonautic_ Expedition about 44 years after the death of _Solomon_, as
above: and in the days of _Thales_, the Solstices and Equinoxes, by this
reckoning, will have been in the middle of the eleventh Degrees of the
Signs. But _Thales_, in publishing his book about the Tropics and
Equinoxes, might lean a little to the opinion of former Astronomers, so as
to place them in the twelfth Degrees of the Signs.

_Meton_ and _Euctemon_, [80] in order to publish the Lunar Cycle of
nineteen years, observed the Summer Solstice in the year of _Nabonassar_
316, the year before the _Peloponnesian_ war began; and _Columella_ [81]
tells us that they placed it in the eighth Degree of _Cancer_, which is at
least seven Degrees backwarder than at first. Now the Equinox, after the
rate of a Degree in Seventy and two years, goes backwards seven Degrees in
504 years: count backwards those years from the 316th year of _Nabonassar_,
and the _Argonautic_ Expedition will fall upon the 44th year after the
death of _Solomon_, or thereabout, as above. And thus you see the truth of
what we cited above out of _Achilles Tatius_; viz. that some anciently
placed the Solstice in the eighth Degree of _Cancer_, others about the
twelfth Degree, and others about the fifteenth Degree thereof.

_Hipparchus_ the great Astronomer, comparing his own Observations with
those of former Astronomers, concluded first of any man, that the Equinoxes
had a motion backwards in respect of the fixt Stars: and his opinion was,
that they went backwards one Degree in about an hundred years. He made his
observations of the Equinoxes between the years of _Nabonassar_ 586 and
618: the middle year is 602, which is 286 years after the aforesaid
observation of _Meton_ and _Euctemon_; and in these years the Equinox must
have gone backwards four degrees, and so have been in the fourth Degree of
_Aries_ in the days of _Hipparchus_, and by consequence have then gone back
eleven Degrees since the _Argonautic_ Expedition; that is, in 1090 years,
according to the Chronology of the ancient _Greeks_ then in use: and this
is after the rate of about 99 years, or in the next round number an hundred
years to a Degree, as was then stated by _Hipparchus_. But it really went
back a Degree in seventy and two years, and eleven Degrees in 792 years:
count these 792 years backward from the year of _Nabonassar,_ 602, the year
from which we counted the 286 years, and the reckoning will place the
_Argonautic_ Expedition about 43 years after the death of _Solomon_. The
_Greeks_ have therefore made the _Argonautic_ Expedition about three
hundred years ancienter than the truth, and thereby given occasion to the
opinion of the great _Hipparchus_, that the Equinox went backward after the
rate of only a Degree in an hundred years.

_Hesiod_ tells us that sixty days after the winter Solstice the Star
_Arcturus_ rose just at Sunset: and thence it follows that _Hesiod_
flourished about an hundred years after the death of _Solomon_, or in the
Generation or Age next after the _Trojan_ war, as _Hesiod_ himself
declares.

From all these circumstances, grounded upon the coarse observations of the
ancient Astronomers, we may reckon it certain that the _Argonautic_
Expedition was not earlier than the Reign of _Solomon_: and if these
Astronomical arguments be added to the former arguments taken from the mean
length of the Reigns of Kings, according to the course of nature; from them
all we may safely conclude that the _Argonautic_ Expedition was after the
death of _Solomon_, and most probably that it was about 43 years after it.

The _Trojan_ War was one Generation later than that Expedition, as was said
above, several Captains of the _Greeks_ in that war being sons of the
_Argonauts_: and the ancient _Greeks_ reckoned _Memnon_ or _Amenophis_,
King of _Egypt_, to have Reigned in the times of that war, feigning him to
be the son of _Tithonus_ the elder brother of _Priam_, and in the end of
that war to have come from _Susa_ to the assistance of _Priam_. _Amenophis_
was therefore of the same age with the elder children of _Priam_, and was
with his army at _Susa_ in the last year of that war: and after he had
there finished the _Memnonia_, he might return into _Egypt_, and adorn it
with Buildings, and Obelisks, and Statues, and die there about 90 or 95
years after the death of _Solomon_; when he had determined and settled the
beginning of the new _Egyptian_ year of 365 days upon the Vernal Equinox,
so as to deserve the Monument above-mentioned in memory thereof.

_Rehoboam_ was born in the last year of King _David_, being 41 years old at
the Death of _Solomon_, 1 _Kings_ xiv. 21. and therefore his father
_Solomon_ was probably born in the 18th year of King _David's_ Reign, or
before: and two or three years before his Birth, _David_ besieged _Rabbah_
the Metropolis of the _Ammonites_, and committed adultery with _Bathsheba_:
and the year before this siege began, _David_ vanquished the _Ammonites_,
and their Confederates the _Syrians_ of _Zobah_, and _Rehob_, and _Ishtob_,
and _Maacah_, and _Damascus_, and extended his Dominion over all these
Nations as far as to the entring in of _Hamath_ and the River _Euphrates_:
and before this war began he smote _Moab_, and _Ammon_, and _Edom_, and
made the _Edomites_ fly, some of them into _Egypt_ with their King _Hadad_,
then a little child; and others to the _Philistims_, where they fortified
_Azoth_ against _Israel_; and others, I think, to the _Persian Gulph_, and
other places whither they could escape: and before this he had several
Battles with the _Philistims_: and all this was after the eighth year of
his Reign, in which he came from _Hebron_ to _Jerusalem_. We cannot err
therefore above two or three years, if we place this Victory over _Edom_ in
the eleventh or twelfth year of his Reign; and that over _Ammon_ and the
_Syrians_ in the fourteenth. After the flight of _Edom_, the King of _Edom_
grew up, and married _Tahaphenes_ or _Daphnis_, the sister of _Pharaoh_'s
Queen, and before the Death of _David_ had by her a son called _Genubah_,
and this son was brought up among the children of _Pharaoh_: and among
these children was the chief or _first born of her mother's children_, whom
_Solomon_ married in the beginning of his Reign; and her _little sister
who_ at that time _had no breasts_, and her _brother who_ then _sucked the
breasts of his mother_, _Cant._ vi. 9. and viii. 1, 8: and of about the
same Age with these children was _Sesac_ or _Sesostris_; for he became King
of _Egypt_ in the Reign of _Solomon_, 1 _Kings_ xi. 40; and before he began
to Reign he warred under his father, and whilst he was very young,
conquered _Arabia_, _Troglodytica_ and _Libya_, and then invaded
_Ethiopia_; and succeeding his father Reigned 'till the fifth year of
_Asa_: and therefore he was of about the same age with the children of
_Pharaoh_ above-mentioned; and might be one of them, and be born near the
end of _David_'s Reign, and be about 46 years old when he came out of
_Egypt_ with a great Army to invade the East: and by reason of his great
Conquests, he was celebrated in several Nations by several Names. The
_Chaldæans_ called him _Belus_, which in their Language signified _the
Lord_: the _Arabians_ called him _Bacchus_, which in their Language
signified _the great_: the _Phrygians_ and _Thracians_ called him
_Ma-fors_, _Mavors_, _Mars_, which signified _the valiant_: and thence the
_Amazons_, whom he carried from _Thrace_ and left at _Thermodon_, called
themselves the daughters of _Mars_. The _Egyptians_ before his Reign called
him their _Hero_ or _Hercules_; and after his death, by reason of his great
works done to the River _Nile_, dedicated that River to him, and Deified
him by its names _Sihor_, _Nilus_ and _Ægyptus_; and the _Greeks_ hearing
them lament _0 Sihor, Bou Sihor_, called him _Osiris_ and _Busiris_.
_Arrian_ [82] tells us that the _Arabians_ worshipped, only two Gods,
_Cœlus_ and _Dionysus_; and that they worshipped _Dionysus_ for the glory
of leading his Army into _India_. The _Dionysus_ of the _Arabians_ was
_Bacchus_, and all agree that _Bacchus_ was the same King of _Egypt_ with
_Osiris_: and the _Cœlus_, or _Uranus_, or _Jupiter Uranius_ of the
_Arabians_, I take to be the same King of _Egypt_ with His father _Ammon_,
according to the Poet:

  _Quamvis Æthiopum populis, Arabumque beatis_
  _Gentibus, atque Indis unus sit Jupiter Ammon._

I place the end of the Reign of _Sesac_ upon the fifth year of _Asa_,
because in that year _Asa_ became free from the Dominion of _Egypt_, so as
to be able to fortify _Judæa_, and raise that great Army with which he met
_Zerah_, and routed him. _Osiris_ was therefore slain in the fifth year of
_Asa_, by his brother _Japetus_, whom the _Egyptians_ called _Typhon_,
_Python_, and _Neptune_: and then the _Libyans_, under _Japetus_ and his
son _Atlas_, invaded _Egypt_, and raised that famous war between the Gods
and Giants, from whence the _Nile_ had the name of _Eridanus_: but _Orus_
the son of _Osiris_, by the assistance of the _Ethiopians_, prevailed, and
Reigned 'till the 15th year of _Asa_: and then the _Ethiopians_ under
_Zerah_ invaded _Egypt_, drowned _Orus_ in _Eridanus_, and were routed by
_Asa_, so that _Zerah_ could not recover himself. _Zerah_ was succeeded by
_Amenophis_, a youth of the Royal Family of the _Ethiopians_, and I think
the son of _Zerah_: but the People of the lower _Egypt_ revolted from him,
and set up _Osarsiphus_ over them, and called to their assistance a great
body of men from _Phœnicia_, I think a part of the Army of _Asa_; and
thereupon _Amenophis_, with the remains of his father's Army of
_Ethiopians_, retired from the lower _Egypt_ to _Memphis_, and there turned
the River _Nile_ into a new channel, under a new bridge which he built
between two Mountains; and at the same time he built and fortified that
City against _Osarsiphus_, calling it by his own name, _Amenoph_ or
_Memphis_: and then he retired into _Ethiopia_, and stayed there thirteen
years; and then came back with a great Army, and subdued the lower _Egypt_,
expelling the People which had been called in from _Phœnicia_: and this I
take to be the second expulsion of the Shepherds. Dr. _Castel_ [83] tells
us, that in _Coptic_ this City is called _Manphtha_; whence by contraction
came its Names _Moph_, _Noph_.

While _Amenophis_ staid in _Ethiopia_, _Egypt_ was in its greatest
distraction: and then it was, as I conceive, that the _Greeks_ hearing
thereof contrived the _Argonautic_ Expedition, and sent the flower of
_Greece_ in the Ship _Argo_ to persuade the Nations upon the Sea Coasts of
the _Euxine_ and _Mediterranean Seas_ to revolt from _Egypt_, and set up
for themselves, as the _Libyans_, _Ethiopians_ and _Jews_ had done before.
And this is a further argument for placing that Expedition about 43 years
after the Death of _Solomon_; this Period being in the middle of the
distraction of _Egypt_. _Amenophis_ might return from _Ethiopia_, and
conquer the lower _Egypt_ about eight years after that Expedition, and
having settled his Government over it, he might, for putting a stop to the
revolting of the eastern Nations, lead his Army into _Persia_, and leave
_Proteus_ at _Memphis_ to govern _Egypt_ in his absence, and stay some time
at _Susa_, and build the _Memnonia_, fortifying that City, as the
Metropolis of his Dominion in those parts.

_Androgeus_ the son of _Minos_, upon his overcoming in the _Athenæa_, or
quadrennial Games at _Athens_ in his youth, was perfidiously slain out of
envy: and _Minos_ thereupon made war upon the _Athenians_, and compelled
them to send every eighth year to _Crete_ seven beardless Youths, and as
many young Virgins, to be given as a reward to him that should get the
Victory in the like Games instituted in _Crete_ in honour of _Androgeus_.
These Games seem to have been celebrated in the beginning of the
_Octaeteris_, and the _Athenæa_ in the beginning of the _Tetraeteris_, then
brought into _Crete_ and _Greece_ by the _Phœnicians_ and upon the third
payment of the tribute of children, that is, about seventeen years after
the said war was at an end, and about nineteen or twenty years after the
death of _Androgeus_, _Theseus_ became Victor, and returned from _Crete_
with _Ariadne_ the daughter of _Minos_; and coming to the Island _Naxus_ or
_Dia_, [84] _Ariadne_ was there relinquished by him, and taken up by
_Glaucus_, an _Egyptian_ Commander at Sea, and became the mistress of the
great _Bacchus_, who at that time returned from _India_ in Triumph; and
[85] by him she had two sons, _Phlyas_ and _Eumedon_, who were _Argonauts_.
This _Bacchus_ was caught in bed in _Phrygia_ with _Venus_ the mother of
_Æneas_, according [86] to _Homer_; just before he came over the
_Hellespont_, and invaded _Thrace_; and he married _Ariadne_ the daughter
of _Minos_, according to _Hesiod_ [87]: and therefore by the Testimony of
both _Homer_ and _Hesiod_, who wrote before the _Greeks_ and _Egyptians_
corrupted their Antiquities, this _Bacchus_ was one Generation older than
the _Argonauts_; and so being King of _Egypt_ at the same time with
_Sesostris_, they must be one and the same King: for they agree also in
their actions; _Bacchus_ invaded _India_ and _Greece_, and after he was
routed by the Army of _Perseus_, and the war was composed, the _Greeks_ did
him great honours, and built a Temple to him at _Argos_, and called it the
Temple of the _Cresian Bacchus_, because _Ariadne_ was buried in it, as
_Pausanias_ [88] relates. _Ariadne_ therefore died in the end of the war,
just before the return of _Sesostris_ into _Egypt_, that is, in the 14th
year of _Rehoboam_: She was taken from _Naxus_ upon the return of _Bacchus_
from _India_, and then became the Mistress of _Bacchus_, and accompanied
him in his Triumphs; and therefore the expedition of _Theseus_ to _Crete_,
and the death of his father _Ægeus_, was about nine or ten years after the
death of _Solomon_. _Theseus_ was then a beardless young man, suppose about
19 or 20 years old, and _Androgeus_ was slain about twenty years before,
being then about 20 or 22 years old; and his father _Minos_ might be about
25 years older, and so be born about the middle of _David_'s Reign, and be
about 70 years old when he pursued _Dædalus_ into _Sicily_: and _Europa_
and her brother _Cadmus_ might come into _Europe_, two or three years
before the birth of _Minos_.

_Justin_, in his 18th book, tells us: _A rege Ascaloniorum expugnati
Sidonii navibus appulsi Tyron urbem ante annum * * Trojanæ cladis
condiderunt_ And _Strabo_, [89] that _Aradus was built by the men who fled
from _Zidon__. Hence [90] _Isaiah_ calls _Tyre_ _the daughter of _Zidon_,
the inhabitants of the Isle whom the Merchants of _Zidon_ have
replenished_: and [91] _Solomon_ in the beginning of his Reign calls the
People of _Tyre_ _Zidonians_. _My Servants_, saith he, in a Message to
_Hiram_ King of _Tyre_, _shall be with thy Servants, and unto thee will I
give hire for thy Servants according to all that thou desirest: for thou
knowest that there is not among us any that can skill to hew timber like
the _Zidonians__. The new Inhabitants of _Tyre_ had not yet lost the name
of _Zidonians_, nor had the old Inhabitants, if there were any considerable
number of them, gained the reputation of the new ones for skill in hewing
of timber, as they would have done had navigation been long in use at
_Tyre_. The Artificers who came from _Zidon_ were not dead, and the flight
of the _Zidonians_ was in the Reign of _David_, and by consequence in the
beginning of the Reign of _Abibalus_ the father of _Hiram_, and the first
King of _Tyre_ mentioned in History. _David_ in the twelfth year of his
Reign conquered _Edom_, as above, and made some of the _Edomites_, and
chiefly the Merchants and Seamen, fly from the _Red Sea_ to the
_Philistims_ upon the _Mediterranean_, where they fortified _Azoth_. For
[92] _Stephanus_ tells us: Ταυτην εκτισεν ‛εις των επανελθοντων απ' Ερυθρας
θαλασσης Φευγαδων: _One of the Fugitives from the Red Sea built_ Azoth:
that is, a Prince of _Edom_, who fled from _David_, fortified _Azoth_ for
the _Philistims_ against him. The _Philistims_ were now grown very strong,
by the access of the _Edomites_ and Shepherds, and by their assistance
invaded and took _Zidon_, that being a town very convenient for the
Merchants who fled from the _Red Sea_: and then did the _Zidonians_ fly by
Sea to _Tyre_ and _Aradus_, and to other havens in _Asia Minor_, _Greece_,
and _Libya_, with which, by means of their trade, they had been acquainted
before; the great wars and victories of _David_ their enemy, prompting them
to fly by Sea: for [93] they went with a great multitude, not to seek
_Europa_ as was pretended, but to seek new Seats, and therefore fled from
their enemies: and when some of them fled under _Cadmus_ and his brothers
to _Cilicia_, _Asia minor_, and _Greece_; others fled under other
Commanders to seek new Seats in _Libya_, and there built many walled towns,
as _Nonnus_ [94] affirms: and their leader was also there called _Cadmus_,
which word signifies an eastern man, and his wife was called _Sithonis_ a
_Zidonian_. Many from those Cities went afterwards with the great _Bacchus_
in his Armies: and by these things, the taking of _Zidon_, and the flight
of the _Zidonians_ under _Abibalus_, _Cadmus_, _Cilix_, _Thasus_,
_Membliarius_, _Atymnus_, and other Captains, to _Tyre_, _Aradus_,
_Cilicia_, _Rhodes_, _Caria_, _Bithynia_, _Phrygia_, _Calliste_, _Thasus_,
_Samothrace_, _Crete_, _Greece_ and _Libya_, and the building of _Tyre_ and
_Thebes_, and beginning of the Reigns of _Abibalus_ and _Cadmus_ over those
Cities, are fixed upon the fifteenth or sixteenth year of _David_'s Reign,
or thereabout. By means of these Colonies of _Phœnicians_, the people of
_Caria_ learnt sea-affairs, in such small vessels with oars as were then in
use, and began to frequent the _Greek Seas_, and people some of the Islands
therein, before the Reign of _Minos_: for _Cadmus_, in coming to _Greece_,
arrived first at _Rhodes_, an Island upon the borders of _Caria_, and left
there a Colony of _Phœnicians_, who sacrificed men to _Saturn_, and the
_Telchines_ being repulsed by _Phoroneus_, retired from _Argos_ to _Rhodes_
with _Phorbas_, who purged the Island from Serpents; and _Triopas_, the son
of _Phorbas_, carried a Colony from _Rhodes_ to _Caria_, and there
possessed himself of a promontory, thence called _Triopium_: and by this
and such like Colonies _Caria_ was furnished with Shipping and Seamen, and
called [95] _Phœnice_. _Strabo_ and _Herodotus_ [96] tell us, that the
_Cares_ were called _Leleges_, and became subject to _Minos_, and lived
first in the Islands of the _Greek Seas_, and went thence into _Caria_, a
country possest before by some of the _Leleges_ and _Pelasgi_: whence it's
probable that when _Lelex_ and _Pelasgus_ came first into _Greece_ to seek
new Seats, they left part of their Colonies in _Caria_ and the neighbouring
Islands.

The _Zidonians_ being still possessed of the trade of the _Mediterranean_,
as far westward as _Greece_ and _Libya_, and the trade of the _Red Sea_
being richer; the _Tyrians_ traded on the _Red Sea_ in conjunction with
_Solomon_ and the Kings of _Judah_, 'till after the _Trojan_ war; and so
also did the Merchants of _Aradus_, _Arvad_, or _Arpad_: for in the
_Persian Gulph_ [97] were two Islands called _Tyre_ and _Aradus_, which had
Temples like the _Phœnician_; and therefore the _Tyrians_ and _Aradians_
sailed thither, and beyond, to the Coasts of _India_, while the _Zidonians_
frequented the _Mediterranean_: and hence it is that _Homer_ celebrates
_Zidon_, and makes no mention of _Tyre_. But at length, [98] in the Reign
of _Jehoram_ King of _Judah_, _Edom_ revolted from the Dominion of _Judah_,
and made themselves a King; and the trade of _Judah_ and _Tyre_ upon the
_Red Sea_ being thereby interrupted, the _Tyrians_ built ships for
merchandise upon the _Mediterranean_, and began there to make long Voyages
to places not yet frequented by the _Zidonians_; some of them going to the
coasts of _Afric_ beyond the _Syrtes_, and building _Adrymetum_,
_Carthage_, _Leptis_, _Utica_, and _Capsa_; and others going to the Coasts
of _Spain_, and building _Carteia_, _Gades_ and _Tartessus_; and others
going further to the _Fortunate Islands_, and to _Britain_ and _Thule_.
_Jehoram_ Reigned eight years, and the two last years was sick in his
bowels, and before that sickness _Edom_ revolted, because of _Jehoram_'s
wicked Reign: if we place that revolt about the middle of the first six
years, it will fall upon the fifth year of _Pygmalion_ King of _Tyre_, and
so was about twelve or fifteen years after the taking of _Troy_: and then,
by reason of this revolt, the _Tyrians_ retired from the _Red Sea_, and
began long Voyages upon the _Mediterranean_; for in the seventh year of
_Pygmalion_, his Sister _Dido_ sailed to the Coast of _Afric_ beyond the
_Syrtes_, and there built _Carthage_. This retiring of the _Tyrians_ from
the _Red Sea_ to make long Voyages on the _Mediterranean_, together with
the flight of the _Edomites_ from _David_ to the _Philistims_, gave
occasion to the tradition both of the ancient _Persians_, and of the
_Phœnicians_ themselves, that the _Phœnicians_ came originally from the
_Red Sea_ to the coasts of the _Mediterranean_, and presently undertook
long Voyages, as _Herodotus_ [99] relates: for _Herodotus_, in the
beginning of his first book, relates that the _Phœnicians_ coming from the
_Red Sea_ to the _Mediterranean_, and beginning to make long Voyages with
_Egyptian_ and _Assyrian_ wares, among other places came to _Argos_, and
having sold their wares, seized and carried away into _Egypt_ some of the
_Grecian_ women who came to buy them; and amongst those women was _Io_ the
daughter of _Inachus_. The _Phœnicians_ therefore came from the _Red Sea_,
in the days of _Io_ and her brother _Phoroneus_ King of _Argos_, and by
consequence at that time when _David_ conquered the _Edomites_, and made
them fly every way from the _Red Sea_; some into _Egypt_ with their young
King, and others to the _Philistims_ their next neighbours and the enemies
of _David_. And this flight gave occasion to the _Philistims_ to call many
places _Erythra_, in memory of their being _Erythreans_ or _Edomites_, and
of their coming from the _Erythrean_ Sea; for _Erythra_ was the name of a
City in _Ionia_, of another in _Libya_, of another in _Locris_, of another
in _Bœotia_, of another in _Cyprus_, of another in _Ætolia_, of another in
_Asia_ near _Chius_; and _Erythia Acra_ was a promontory in _Libya_, and
_Erythræum_ a promontory in _Crete_, and _Erythros_ a place near _Tybur_,
and _Erythini_ a City or Country in _Paphlagonia_: and the name _Erythea_
or _Erythræ_ was given to the Island _Gades_, peopled by _Phœnicians_. So
_Solinus_, [100] _In capite Bæticæ insula a continenti septingentis
passibus memoratur quam Tyrii a rubro mari profecti Erytheam, Pœni sua
lingua Gadir, id est sepem nominarunt._ And _Pliny_, [101] concerning a
little Island near it; _Erythia dicta est quoniam Tyrii Aborigines eorum,
orti ab Erythræo mari ferebantur._ Among the _Phœnicians_ who came with
_Cadmus_ into _Greece_, there were [102] _Arabians_, and [103] _Erythreans_
or Inhabitants of the _Red Sea_, that is _Edomites_; and in _Thrace_ there
settled a People who were circumcised and called _Odomantes_, that is, as
some think, _Edomites_. _Edom_, _Erythra_ and _Phœnicia_ are names of the
same signification, the words denoting a red colour: which makes it
probable that the _Erythreans_ who fled from _David_, settled in great
numbers in _Phœnicia_, that is, in all the Sea-coasts of _Syria_ from
_Egypt_ to _Zidon_; and by calling themselves _Phœnicians_ in the language
of _Syria_, instead of _Erythreans_, gave the name of _Phœnicia_ to all
that Sea-coast, and to that only. So _Strabo_: [104] ‛Οι μεν γαρ και τους
Φοινικας, και τους Σιδονιους τους καθ' ‛ημας αποικους ειναι των εν τωι
Ωκεανωι φασι, προστιθεντες και δια τι Φοινικες εκαλουντο, ‛οτι και ‛η
θαλαττα ερυθρα. _Alii referunt Phœnices & Sidonios nostros esse colonos
eorum qui sunt in Oceano, addentes illos ideo vocari Phœnices _[puniceos]_
quod mare rubrum sit._

_Strabo_ [105] mentioning the first men who left the Sea-coasts, and
ventured out into the deep, and undertook long Voyages, names _Bacchus_,
_Hercules_, _Jason_, _Ulysses_ and _Menelaus_; and saith that the Dominion
of _Minos_ over the Sea was celebrated, and the Navigation of the
_Phœnicians_ who went beyond the Pillars of _Hercules_, and built Cities
there, and in the middle of the Sea-coasts of _Afric_, presently after the
war of _Troy_. These _Phœnicians_ [106] were the _Tyrians_, who at that
time built _Carthage_ in _Afric_, and _Carteia_ in _Spain_, and _Gades_ in
the Island of that name without the _Straights_; and gave the name of
_Hercules_ to their chief Leader, because of his labours and success, and
that of _Heraclea_ to the city _Carteia_ which he built. So _Strabo_: [107]
Εκπλεουσιν ουν εκ της ‛ημετερας θαλαττης εις την εξω, δεξιον εστι τουτο·
και προς αυτο Καλπη [Καρτηια] [108] πολις εν τετταρακοντα σταδιοις
αξιολογος και παλαια, ναυσταθμον ποτε γενομενη των Ιβηρων· ενιοι δε και
Ηρακλεους κτισμα λεγουσιν αυτην, ‛ων εστι και Τιμοσθενης· ‛ος Φησι και
Ηρακλειαν ονομαζεσθαι το παλαιον· δεικνυσθαι τε μεγαν περιβολον, και
νεωσοικους. _Mons Calpe ad dextram est e nostro mari foras navigantibus, &
ad quadraginta inde stadia urbs Carteia vetusta ac memorabilis, olim statio
navibus Hispanorum. Hanc ab Hercule quidam conditam aiunt, inter quos est
Timosthenes, qui eam antiquitus Heracleam fuisse appellatam refert,
ostendique adhuc magnum murorum circuitum & navalia._ This _Hercules_, in
memory of his building and Reigning over the City _Carteia_, they called
also _Melcartus_, the King of _Carteia_. _Bochart_ [109] writes, that
_Carteia_ was at first called _Melcarteia_, from its founder _Melcartus_,
and by an _Aphæresis_, _Carteia_; and that _Melcartus_ signifies _Melec
Kartha_, the King of the city, that is, saith he, of the city _Tyre_: but
considering that no ancient Author tells us, that _Carteia_ was ever called
_Melcarteia_, or that _Melcartus_ was King of _Tyre_; I had rather say that
_Melcartus_, or _Melecartus_, had his name from being the Founder and
Governor or Prince of the city _Carteia_. Under _Melcartus_ the _Tyrians_
sailed as far as _Tartessus_ or _Tarshish_, a place in the Western part of
_Spain_, between the two mouths of the river _Bœtis_, and there they [110]
met with much silver, which they purchased for trifles: they sailed also as
far as _Britain_ before the death of _Melcartus_; for [111] _Pliny_ tells
us, _Plumbum ex Cassiteride insula primus apportavit Midacritus_: And
_Bochart_ [112] observes that _Midacritus_ is a _Greek_ name corruptly
written for _Melcartus_; _Britain_ being unknown to the _Greeks_ long after
it was discovered by the _Phœnicians_. After the death of _Melcartus_, they
[113] built a Temple to him in the Island _Gades_, and adorned it with the
sculptures of the labours of _Hercules_, and of his _Hydra_, and the Horses
to whom he threw _Diomedes_, King of the _Bistones_ in _Thrace_, to be
devoured. In this Temple was the golden Belt of _Teucer_, and the golden
Olive of _Pygmalion_ bearing _Smaragdine_ fruit: and by these consecrated
gifts of _Teucer_ and _Pygmalion_, you may know that it was built in their
days. _Pomponius_ derives it from the times of the _Trojan_ war; for
_Teucer_, seven years after that war, according to the Marbles, arrived at
_Cyprus_, being banished from home by his father _Telamon_, and there built
_Salamis_: and he and his Posterity Reigned there 'till _Evagoras_, the
last of them, was conquered by the _Persians_, in the twelfth year of
_Artaxerxes Mnemon_. Certainly this _Tyrian Hercules_ could be no older
than the _Trojan_ war, because the _Tyrians_ did not begin to navigate the
_Mediterranean_ 'till after that war: for _Homer_ and _Hesiod_ knew nothing
of this navigation, and the _Tyrian Hercules_ went to the coasts of
_Spain_, and was buried in _Gades_: so _Arnobius_ [114]; _Tyrius Hercules
sepultus in finibus Hispaniæ_: and _Mela_, speaking of the Temple of
_Hercules_ in _Gades_, saith, _Cur sanctum sit ossa ejus ibi sepulta
efficiunt_. _Carthage_ [115] paid tenths to this _Hercules_, and sent their
payments yearly to _Tyre_: and thence it's probable that this _Hercules_
went to the coast of _Afric_, as well as to that of _Spain_, and by his
discoveries prepared the way to _Dido_: _Orosius_ [116] and others tell us
that he built _Capsa_ there. _Josephus_ tells of an earlier _Hercules_, to
whom _Hiram_ built a Temple at _Tyre_: and perhaps there might be also an
earlier _Hercules_ of _Tyre_, who set on foot their trade on the _Red Sea_
in the days of _David_ or _Solomon_.

_Tatian_, in his book against the _Greeks_, relates, that amongst the
_Phœnicians_ flourished three ancient Historians, _Theodotus_, _Hysicrates_
and _Mochus_, _who all of them delivered in their histories, translated
into _Greek_ by _Latus_, under which of the Kings happened the rapture of
_Europa_; the voyage of _Menelaus_ into _Phœnicia_; and the league and
friendship between _Solomon_ and _Hiram_, when _Hiram_ gave his daughter to
_Solomon_, and furnished him with timber for building the Temple: and that
the same is affirmed by _Menander_ of _Pergamus__. _Josephus_ [117] lets us
know that the Annals of the _Tyrians_, from the days of _Abibalus_ and
_Hiram_, Kings of _Tyre_, were extant in his days; and that _Menander_ of
_Pergamus_ translated them into _Greek_, and that _Hiram_'s friendship to
_Solomon_, and assistance in building the Temple, was mentioned in them;
and that the Temple was founded in the eleventh year of _Hiram_: and by the
testimony of _Menander_ and the ancient _Phœnician_ historians, the rapture
of _Europa_, and by consequence the coming of her brother _Cadmus_ into
_Greece_, happened within the time of the Reigns of the Kings of _Tyre_
delivered in these histories; and therefore not before the Reign of
_Abibalus_, the first of them, nor before the Reign of King _David_ his
contemporary. The voyage of _Menelaus_ might be after the destruction of
_Troy_. _Solomon_ therefore Reigned in the times between the raptures of
_Europa_ and _Helena_, and _Europa_ and her brother _Cadmus_ flourished in
the days or _David_. _Minos_, the son of _Europa_, flourished in the Reign
of _Solomon_, and part of the Reign of _Rehoboam_: and the children of
_Minos_, namely _Androgeus_ his eldest son, _Deucalion_ his youngest son
and one of the _Argonauts_, _Ariadne_ the mistress of _Theseus_ and
_Bacchus_, and _Phædra_ the wife of _Theseus_; flourished in the latter end
of _Solomon_, and in the Reigns of _Rehoboam_, _Abijah_ and _Asa_: and
_Idomeneus_, the grandson of _Minos_, was at the war of _Troy_: and _Hiram_
succeeded his father _Abibalus_, in the three and twentieth year of
_David_: and _Abibalus_ might found the Kingdom of _Tyre_ about sixteen or
eighteen years before, when _Zidon_ was taken by the _Philistims_; and the
_Zidonians_ fled from thence, under the conduct of _Cadmus_ and other
commanders, to seek new seats. Thus by the Annals of _Tyre_, and the
ancient _Phœnician_ Historians who followed them, _Abibalus_, _Alymnus_,
_Cadmus_, and _Europa_ fled from _Zidon_ about the sixteenth year of
_David_'s Reign: and the _Argonautic_ Expedition being later by about three
Generations, will be about three hundred years later than where the
_Greeks_ have placed it.

After Navigation in long ships with sails, and one order of oars, had been
propagated from _Egypt_ to _Phœnicia_ and _Greece_, and thereby the
_Zidonians_ had extended their trade to _Greece_, and carried it on about
an hundred and fifty years; and then the _Tyrians_ being driven from the
_Red Sea_ by the _Edomites_, had begun a new trade on the _Mediterranean_
with _Spain_, _Afric_, _Britain_, and other remote nations; they carried it
on about an hundred and sixty years; and then the _Corinthians_ began to
improve Navigation, by building bigger ships with three orders of oars,
called _Triremes_. For [118] _Thucydides_ tells us that the _Corinthians_
were the first of the _Greeks_ who built such ships, and that a
ship-carpenter of _Corinth_ went thence to _Samos_, about 300 years before
the end of the _Peloponnesian_ war, and built also four ships for the
_Samians_; and that 260 years before the end of that war, that is, about
the 29th Olympiad, there was a fight at sea between the _Corinthians_ and
the _Corcyreans_ which was the oldest sea-fight mentioned in history.
_Thucydides_ tells us further, that the first colony which the _Greeks_
sent into _Sicily_, came from _Chalcis_ in _Eubœa_, under the conduct of
_Thucles_, and built _Naxus_; and the next year _Archias_ came from
_Corinth_ with a colony, and built _Syracuse_; and that _Lamis_ came about
the same time into _Sicily_, with a colony from _Megara_ in _Achaia_, and
lived first at _Trotilum_, and then at _Leontini_, and died at _Thapsus_
near _Syracuse_; and that after his death, this colony was invited by
_Hyblo_ to _Megara_ in _Sicily_, and lived there 245 years, and was then
expelled by _Gelo_ King of _Sicily_. Now _Gelo_ flourished about 78 years
before the end of the _Peloponnesian_ war: count backwards the 78 and the
245 years, and about 12 years more for the Reign of _Lamis_ in _Sicily_,
and the reckoning will place the building of _Syracuse_ about 335 years
before the end of the _Peloponnesian_ war, or in the tenth Olympiad; and
about that time _Eusebius_ and others place it: but it might be twenty or
thirty years later, the antiquities of those days having been raised more
or less by the _Greeks_. From the colonies henceforward sent into _Italy_
and _Sicily_ came the name of _Græcia magna_.

_Thucydides_ [119] tells us further, that the _Greeks_ began to come into
_Sicily_ almost three hundred years after the _Siculi_ had invaded that
Island with an army out of _Italy_: suppose it 280 years after, and the
building of _Syracuse_ 310 years before the end of the _Peloponnesian_ war;
and that invasion of _Sicily_ by the _Siculi_ will be 590 years before the
end of that war, that is, in the 27th year of _Solomon_'s Reign, or
thereabout. _Hellanicus_ [120] tells us, that it was in the third
Generation before the _Trojan_ war; and in the 26th year of the Priesthood
of _Alcinoe_, Priestess of _Juno Argiva_: and _Philistius_ of _Syracuse_,
that it was 80 years before the _Trojan_ war: whence it follows that the
_Trojan_ war and _Argonautic_ Expedition were later than the days of
_Solomon_ and _Rehoboam_, and could not be much earlier than where we have
placed them.

The Kingdom of _Macedon_ [121] was founded by _Caranus_ and _Perdiccas_,
who being of the Race of _Temenus_ King of _Argos_, fled from _Argos_ in
the Reign of _Phidon_ the brother of _Caranus_. _Temenus_ was one of the
three brothers who led the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_, and shared the
conquest among themselves: he obtained _Argos_; and after him, and his son
_Cisus_, the Kingdom of _Argos_ became divided among the posterity of
_Temenus_, until _Phidon_ reunited it, expelling his kindred. _Phidon_ grew
potent, appointed weights and measures in _Peloponnesus_, and coined silver
money; and removing the _Pisæans_ and _Eleans_, presided in the Olympic
games; but was soon after subdued by the _Eleans_ and _Spartans_.
_Herodotus_ [122] reckons that _Perdiccas_ was the first King of _Macedon_;
later writers, as _Livy_, _Pausanias_ and _Suidas_, make _Caranus_ the
first King: _Justin_ calls _Perdiccas_ the Sucessor of _Caranus_; and
_Solinus_ saith that _Perdiccas_ succeeded _Caranus_; and was the first
that obtained the name of King. It's probable that _Caranus_ and
_Perdiccas_ were contemporaries, and fled about the same time from
_Phidon_, and at first erected small principalities in _Macedonia_, which,
after the death of _Caranus_, became one under _Perdiccas_. _Herodotus_
[123] tells us, that after _Perdiccas_ Reigned _Aræus_, or _Argæus_,
_Philip_, _Æropus_, _Alcetas_, _Amyntas_, and _Alexander_, successively.
_Alexander_ was contemporary to _Xerxes_ King of _Persia_, and died _An._
4. Olymp. 79, and was succeeded by _Perdiccas_, and he by his son
_Archelaus_: and _Thucydides_ [124] tells us that there were eight Kings of
_Macedon_ before this _Archelaus_: now by reckoning above forty years
a-piece to these Kings, Chronologers have made _Phidon_ and _Caranus_ older
than the Olympiads; whereas if we should reckon their Reigns at about 18 or
20 years a-piece one with another, the first seven Reigns counted backwards
from the death of this _Alexander_, will place the dominion of _Phidon_,
and the beginning of the Kingdom of _Macedon_ under _Perdiccas_ and
_Caranus_, upon the 46th or 47th Olympiad, or thereabout. It could scarce
be earlier, because _Leocides_ the son of _Phidon_, and _Megacles_ the son
of _Alcmæon_, at one and the same time courted _Agarista_, the daughter of
_Clisthenes_ King of _Sicyon_, as _Herodotus_ [125] tells us; and the
_Amphictyons_, by the advice of _Solon_, made _Alcmæon_, and _Clisthenes_,
and _Eurolycus_ King of _Thessaly_, commanders of their army, in their war
against _Cirrha_; and the _Cirrheans_ were conquered _An._ 2. Olymp. 47.
according to the Marbles. _Phidon_ therefore and his brother _Caranus_ were
contemporary to _Solon_, _Alcmæon_, _Clisthenes_, and _Eurolycus_, and
flourished about the 48th and 49th Olympiads. They were also contemporary
in their later days to _Crœsus_; for _Solon_ conversed with _Crœsus_, and
_Alcmæon_ entertained and conducted the messengers whom _Crœsus_ sent to
consult the Oracle at _Delphi_, _An._ 1. Olymp. 56. according to the
Marbles, and was sent for by _Crœsus_, and rewarded with much riches.

But the times set down in the Marbles before the _Persian_ Empire began,
being collected by reckoning the Reigns of Kings equipollent to
Generations, and three Generations to an hundred years or above; and the
Reigns of Kings, one with another, being shorter in the proportion of about
four to seven; the Chronology set down in the Marbles, until the Conquest
of _Media_ by _Cyrus_, _An._ 4, Olymp. 60, will approach the truth much
nearer, by shortening the times before that Conquest in the proportion of
four to seven. So the _Cirrheans_ were conquered _An._ 2, Olymp. 47,
according to the Marbles, that is 54 years before the Conquest of _Media_;
and these years being shortened in the proportion of four to seven, become
31 years; which subducted from _An._ 4, Olymp. 60, place the Conquest of
_Cirrha_ upon _An._ 1, Olymp. 53: and, by the like correction of the
Marbles, _Alcmæon_ entertained and conducted the messengers whom _Crœsus_
sent to consult the Oracle at _Delphi_, _An._ 1, Olymp. 58; that is, four
years before the Conquest of _Sardes_ by _Cyrus_: and the Tyranny of
_Pisistratus_, which by the Marbles began at _Athens_, _An._ 4, Olymp. 54,
by the like correction began _An._ 3, Olymp. 57; and by consequence _Solon_
died _An._ 4, Olymp. 57. This method may be used alone, where other
arguments are wanting; but where they are not wanting, the best arguments
are to be preferred.

_Iphitus_ [126] presided both in the Temple of _Jupiter Olympius_, and in
the Olympic Games, and so did his Successors 'till the 26th Olympiad; and
so long the victors were rewarded with a _Tripos_: but then the _Pisæans_
getting above the _Eleans_, began to preside, and rewarded the victors with
a Crown, and instituted the _Carnea_ to _Apollo_; and continued to preside
'till _Phidon_ interrupted them, that is, 'till about the time of the 49th
Olympiad: for [127] in the 48th Olympiad the _Eleans_ entered the country
of the _Pisæans_, suspecting their designs, but were prevailed upon to
return home quietly; afterwards the _Pisæans_ confederated with several
other _Greek_ nations, and made war upon the _Eleans_, and in the end were
beaten: in this war I conceive it was that _Phidon_ presided, suppose in
the 49th Olympiad; for [128] in the 50th Olympiad, for putting an end to
the contentions between the Kings about presiding, two men were chosen by
lot out of the city _Elis_ to preside, and their number in the 65th
Olympiad was increased to nine, and afterwards to ten; and these judges
were called _Hellenodicæ_, judges for or in the name of _Greece_.
_Pausanias_ tells us, that the _Eleans_ called in _Phidon_ and together
with him celebrated the 8th Olympiad; he should have said the 49th
Olympiad; but _Herodotus_ tells us, that _Phidon_ removed the _Eleans_; and
both might be true: the _Eleans_ might call in _Phidon_ against the
_Pisæans_, and upon overcoming be refused presiding in the Olympic games by
_Phidon_, and confederate with the _Spartans_, and by their assistance
overthrow the Kingdom of _Phidon_, and recover their ancient right of
presiding in the games.

_Strabo_ [129] tells us that _Phidon_ was the tenth from _Temenus_; not the
tenth King, for between _Cisus_ and _Phidon_ they Reigned not, but the
tenth from father to son, including _Temenus_. If 27 years be reckoned to a
Generation by the eldest sons, the nine intervals will amount unto 243
years, which counted back from the 48th Olympiad, in which _Phidon_
flourished, will place the Return of the _Heraclides_ about fifty years
before the beginning of the Olympiads, as above. But Chronologers reckon
about 515 years from the Return of the _Heraclides_ to the 48th Olympiad,
and account _Phidon_ the seventh from _Temenus_; which is after the rate of
85 years to a Generation, and therefore not to be admitted.

_Cyrus_ took _Babylon_, according to _Ptolomy_'s Canon, nine years before
his death, _An. Nabonass._ 209, _An._ 2, Olymp. 60: and he took _Sardes_ a
little before, namely _An._ 1, Olymp. 59, as _Scaliger_ collects from
_Sosicrates_: _Crœsus_ was then King of _Sardes_, and Reigned fourteen
years, and therefore began to Reign _An._ 3, Olymp. 55. After _Solon_ had
made laws for the _Athenians_, he obliged them upon oath to observe those
laws 'till he returned from his travels; and then travelled ten years,
going to _Egypt_ and _Cyprus_, and visiting _Thales_ of _Miletus_: and upon
His Return to _Athens_, _Pisistratus_ began to affect the Tyranny of that
city, which made _Solon_ travel a second time; and now he was invited by
_Crœsus_ to _Sardes_; and _Crœsus_, before _Solon_ visited him, had subdued
all _Asia Minor_, as far as to the River _Halys_; and therefore he received
that visit towards the latter part of his Reign; and we may place it upon
the ninth year thereof, _An._ 3, Olymp. 57: and the legislature of _Solon_
twelve years earlier, _An._ 3, Olymp. 54: and that of _Draco_ still ten
years earlier, _An._ 1, Olymp. 52. After _Solon_ had visited _Crœsus_, he
went into _Cilicia_ and some other places, and died [130] in his travels:
and this was in the second year of the Tyranny of _Pisistratus_. _Comias_
was Archon when _Solon_ returned from his first travels to _Athens_; and
the next year _Hegestratus_ was Archon, and _Solon_ died before the end of
the year, _An._ 3, Olymp. 57, as above: and by this reckoning the objection
of _Plutarch_ above mentioned is removed.

We have now shewed that the _Phœnicians_ of _Zidon_, under the conduct of
_Cadmus_ and other captains, flying from their enemies, came into _Greece_,
with letters and other arts, about the sixteenth year of King _David_'s
Reign; that _Europa_ the sister of _Cadmus_, fled some days before him from
_Zidon_ and came to _Crete_, and there became the mother of _Minos_, about
the 18th or 20th year of _David_'s Reign; that _Sesostris_ and the great
_Bacchus_, and by consequence also _Osiris_, were one and the same King of
_Egypt_ with _Sesac_, and came out of _Egypt_ in the fifth year of
_Rehoboam_ to invade the nations, and died 25 years after _Solomon_; that
the _Argonautic_ expedition was about 43 years after the death of
_Solomon_; that _Troy_ was taken about 76 or 78 years after the death of
_Solomon_; that the _Phœnicians_ of _Tyre_ were driven from the _Red Sea_
by the _Edomites_, about 87 years after the death of _Solomon_, and within
two or three years began to make long voyages upon the _Mediterranean_,
sailing to _Spain_, and beyond, under a commander whom for his industry,
conduct, and discoveries, they honoured with the names of _Melcartus_ and
_Hercules_; that the return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_ was
about 158 years after the death of _Solomon_; that _Lycurgus_ the
Legislator Reigned at _Sparta_, and gave the three Discs to the Olympic
treasury, _An._ 1, Olymp. 18, or 273 years after the death of _Solomon_,
the _Quinquertium_ being at that time added to the Olympic Games; that the
_Greeks_ began soon after to build _Triremes_, and to send Colonies into
_Sicily_ and _Italy_, which gave the name of _Græcia magna_ to those
countries; that the first _Messenian_ war ended about 350 years after the
death of _Solomon_, _An._ 1, Olymp. 37; that _Phidon_ was contemporary to
_Solon_, and presided in the Olympic Games in the 49th Olympiad, that is,
397 years after the death of _Solomon_; that _Draco_ was Archon, and made
his laws, _An._ 1, Olymp. 52; and _Solon_, _An._ 3, Olymp. 54; and that
_Solon_ visited _Crœsus_ _Ann._ 3, Olymp. 57, or 433 years after the death
of _Solomon_; and _Sardes_ was taken by _Cyrus_ 438 years, and _Babylon_ by
_Cyrus_ 443 years, and _Echatane_ by _Cyrus_ 445 years after the death of
_Solomon_: and these periods being settled, they become a foundation for
building the Chronology of the antient times upon them; and nothing more
remains for settling such a Chronology, than to make these Periods a little
exacter, if it can be, and to shew how the rest of the Antiquities of
_Greece_, _Egypt_, _Assyria_, _Chaldæa_, and _Media_ may suit therewith.

Whilst _Bacchus_ made his expedition into _India_, _Theseus_ left _Ariadne_
in the Island _Naxus_ or _Dia_, as above, and succeeded his father _Ægeus_
at _Athens_; and upon the Return of _Bacchus_ from _India_, _Ariadne_
became his mistress, and accompanied him in his triumphs; and this was
about ten years after the death of _Solomon_: and from that time reigned
eight Kings in _Athens_, viz. _Theseus_, _Menestheus_, _Demophoon_,
_Oxyntes_, _Aphidas_, _Thymætes_, _Melanthus_, and _Codrus_; these Kings,
at 19 years a-piece one with another, might take up about 152 years, and
end about 44 years before the Olympiads: then Reigned twelve Archons for
life, which at 14 or 15 years a-piece, the State being unstable, might take
up about 174 years, and end _An._ 2, Olymp. 33: then reigned seven
decennial Archons, which are usually reckoned at seventy years; but some of
them dying in their Regency, they might not take up above forty years, and
so end about _An._ 2, Olymp. 43, about which time began the Second
_Messenian_ war: these decennial Archons were followed by the annual
Archons, amongst whom were the Legislators _Draco_ and _Solon_. Soon after
the death of _Codrus_, his second Son _Neleus_, not bearing the Reign of
his lame brother _Medon_ at _Athens_, retired into _Asia_, and was followed
by his younger brothers _Androcles_ and _Cyaretus_, and many others: these
had the name of _Ionians_, from _Ion_ the son of _Xuthus_, who commanded
the army of the _Athenians_ at the death of _Erechtheus_, and gave the name
of _Ionia_ to the country which they invaded: and about 20 or 25 years
after the death of _Codrus_, these new Colonies, being now Lords of
_Ionia_, set up over themselves a common Council called _Panionium_, and
composed of Counsellors sent from twelve of their cities, _Miletus_,
_Myus_, _Priene_, _Ephesus_, _Colophon_, _Lebedus_, _Teos_, _Clazomenæ_,
_Phocæa_, _Samos_, _Chios_, and _Erythræa_: and this was the _Ionic_
Migration.

[131] When the _Greeks_ and _Latines_ were forming their Technical
Chronology, there were great disputes about the Antiquity of _Rome_: the
_Greeks_ made it much older than the Olympiads: some of them said it was
built by _Æneas_; others, by _Romus_, the son or grandson of _Æneas_;
others, by _Romus_, the son or grandson of _Latinus_ King of the
_Aborigines_; others, by _Romus_ the son of _Ulysses_, or of _Ascanius_, or
of _Italus_: and some of the _Latines_ at first fell in with the opinion of
the _Greeks_, saying that it was built by _Romulus_, the son or grandson of
_Æneas_. _Timæus Siculus_ represented it built by _Romulus_, the grandson
of _Æneas_, above an hundred years before the Olympiads; and so did
_Nævius_ the Poet, who was twenty years older than _Ennius_, and served in
the first _Punic_ war, and wrote the history of that war. Hitherto nothing
certain was agreed upon, but about 140 or 150 years after the death of
_Alexander the Great_, they began to say that _Rome_ was built a second
time by _Romulus_, in the fifteenth Age after the destruction of _Troy_: by
Ages they meant Reigns of the Kings of the _Latines_ at _Alba_, and
reckoned the first fourteen Reigns at about 432 years, and the following
Reigns of the seven Kings of _Rome_ at 244 years, both which numbers made
up the time of about 676 years from the taking of _Troy_, according to
these Chronologers; but are much too long for the course of nature: and by
this reckoning they placed the building of _Rome_ upon the sixth or seventh
Olympiad; _Varro_ placed it on the first year of the Seventh Olympiad, and
was therein generally followed by the _Romans_; but this can scarce be
reconciled to the course of nature: for I do not meet with any instance in
all history, since Chronology was certain, wherein seven Kings, most of
whom were slain, Reigned 244 years in continual Succession. The fourteen
Reigns of the Kings of the _Latines_, at twenty years a-piece one with
another, amount unto 280 years, and these years counted from the taking of
_Troy_ end in the 38th Olympiad: and the Seven Reigns of the Kings of
_Rome_, four or five of them being slain and one deposed, may at a moderate
reckoning amount to fifteen or sixteen years a-piece one with another: let
them be reckoned at seventeen years a-piece, and they will amount unto 119
years; which being counted backwards from the Regifuge, end also in the
38th Olympiad: and by these two reckonings _Rome_ was built in the 38th
Olympiad, or thereabout. The 280 years and the 119 years together make up
399 years; and the same number of years arises by counting the twenty and
one Reigns at nineteen years a-piece: and this being the whole time between
the taking of _Troy_ and the Regifuge, let these years be counted backward
from the Regifuge, _An._ 1, Olymp. 68, and they will place the taking of
_Troy_ about 74 years after the death of _Solomon_.

When _Sesostris_ returned from _Thrace_ into _Egypt_, he left _Æetes_ with
part of his army in _Colchis_, to guard that pass; and _Phryxus_ and his
sister _Helle_ fled from _Ino_, the daughter of _Cadmus_, to _Æetes_ soon
after, in a ship whose ensign was a golden ram: _Ino_ was therefore alive
in the fourteenth year of _Rehoboam_, the year in which _Sesostris_
returned into _Egypt_; and by consequence her father _Cadmus_ flourished in
the Reign of _David_, and not before. _Cadmus_ was the father of
_Polydorus_, the father of _Labdacus_, the father of _Laius_, the father of
_Oedipus_, the father of _Eteocles_ and _Polynices_ who slew one another in
their youth, in the war of the seven Captains at _Thebes_, about ten or
twelve years after the _Argonautic_ Expedition: and _Thersander_, the son
of _Polynices_, warred at _Troy_. These Generations being by the eldest
sons who married young, if they be reckoned at about twenty and four years
to a Generation, will place the birth of _Polydorus_ upon the 18th year of
_David_'s Reign, or thereabout: and thus _Cadmus_ might be a young man, not
yet married, when he came first into _Greece_. At his first coming he
sail'd to _Rhodes_, and thence to _Samothrace_, an Island near _Thrace_ on
the north side of _Lemnos_, and there married _Harmonia_, the sister of
_Jasius_ and _Dardanus_, which gave occasion to the _Samothracian_
mysteries: and _Polydorus_ might be their son, born a year or two after
their coming; and his sister _Europa_ might be then a young woman, in the
flower of her age. These Generations cannot well be shorter; and therefore
_Cadmus_, and his son _Polydorus_, were not younger than we have reckoned
them: nor can they be much longer, without making _Polydorus_ too old to be
born in _Europe_, and to be the son of _Harmonia_ the sister of _Jasius_.
_Labdacus_ was therefore born in the end of _David_'s Reign, _Laius_ in the
24th year of _Solomon_'s, and _Oedipus_ in the seventh of _Rehoboam_'s, or
thereabout: unless you had rather say, that _Polydorus_ was born at
_Zidon_, before his father came into _Europe_; but his name _Polydorus_ is
in the language of _Greece_.

_Polydorus_ married _Nycteis_, the daughter of _Nycteus_ a native of
_Greece_, and dying young, left his Kingdom and young son _Labdacus_ under
the administration of _Nycteus_. Then _Epopeus_ King of _Ægialus_,
afterwards called _Sicyon_, stole _Antiope_ the daughter of _Nycteus_,
[132] and _Nycteus_ thereupon made war upon him, and in a battle wherein
_Nycteus_ overcame, both were wounded and died soon after. _Nycteus_ left
the tuition of _Labdacus_, and administration of the Kingdom, to his
brother _Lycus_; and _Epopeus_ or, as _Hyginus_ [133] calls him, _Epaphus_
the _Sicyonian_, left his Kingdom to _Lamedon_, who presently ended the
war, by sending home _Antiope_: and she, in returning home, brought forth
_Amphion_ and _Zethus_. _Labdacus_ being grown up received the Kingdom from
_Lycus_, and soon after dying left it again to his administration, for his
young son _Laius_. When _Amphion_ and _Zethus_ were about twenty years old,
at the instigation of their mother _Antiope_, they killed _Lycus_, and made
_Laius_ flee to _Pelops_, and seized the city _Thebes_, and compassed it
with a wall; and _Amphion_ married _Niobe_ the sister of _Pelops_, and by
her had several children, amongst whom was _Chloris_, the mother of
_Periclymenus_ the _Argonaut_. _Pelops_ was the father of _Plisthenes_,
_Atreus_, and _Thyestes_; and _Agamemnon_ and _Menelaus_, the adopted sons
of _Atreus_, warred at _Troy_. _Ægisthus_, the son of _Thyestes_, slew
_Agamemnon_ the year after the taking of _Troy_; and _Atreus_ died just
before _Paris_ stole _Helena_, which, according to [134] _Homer_, was
twenty years before the taking of _Troy_. _Deucalion_ the son of _Minos_,
[135] was an _Argonaut_; and _Talus_ another son of _Minos_, was slain by
the _Argonauts_; and _Idomeneus_ and _Meriones_ the grandsons of _Minos_
were at the _Trojan_ war. All these things confirm the ages of _Cadmus_ and
_Europa_, and their posterity, above assigned, and place the death of
_Epopeus_ or _Epaphus_ King of _Sicyon_, and birth of _Amphion_ and
_Zethus_, upon the tenth year of _Solomon_; and the taking of _Thebes_ by
_Amphion_ and _Zethus_, and the flight of _Laius_ to _Pelops_, upon the
thirtieth year of that King, or thereabout. _Amphion_ might marry the
sister of _Pelops_, the same year, and _Pelops_ come into _Greece_ three or
four years before that flight, or about the 26th year of _Solomon_.

[Sidenode p: Hygin. Fab. 14.]

In the days of _Erechtheus_ King of _Athens_, and _Celeus_ King of
_Eleusis_, _Ceres_ came into _Attica_; and educated _Triptolemus_ the son
of _Celeus_, and taught him to sow corn. She [136] lay with _Jasion_, or
_Jasius_, the brother of _Harmonia_ the wife of _Cadmus_; and presently
after her death _Erechtheus_ was slain, in a war between the _Athenians_
and _Eleusinians_; and, for the benefaction of bringing tillage into
_Greece_, the _Eleusinia Sacra_ were instituted to her [137] with
_Egyptian_ ceremonies, by _Celeus_ and _Eumolpus_; and a Sepulchre or
Temple was erected to her in _Eleusine_, and in this Temple the families of
_Celeus_ and _Eumolpus_ became her Priests: and this Temple, and that which
_Eurydice_ erected to her daughter _Danae_, by the name of _Juno Argiva_,
are the first instances that I meet with in _Greece_ of Deifying the dead,
with Temples, and Sacred Rites, and Sacrifices, and Initiations, and a
succession of Priests to perform them. Now by this history it is manifest
that _Erechtheus_, _Celeus_, _Eumolpus_, _Ceres_, _Jasius_, _Cadmus_,
_Harmonia_, _Asterius_, and _Dardanus_ the brother of _Jasius_, and one of
the founders of the Kingdom of _Troy_, were all contemporary to one
another, and flourished in their youth, when _Cadmus_ came first into
_Europe_. _Erechtheus_ could not be much older, because his daughter
_Procris_ convers'd with _Minos_ King of _Crete_; and his grandson
_Thespis_ had fifty daughters, who lay with _Hercules_; and his daughter
_Orithyia_ was the mother of _Calais_ and _Zetes_, two of the _Argonauts_
in their youth; and his son _Orneus_ [138] was the father of _Peteos_ the
father of _Menestheus_, who warred at _Troy_: nor much younger, because his
second son _Pandion_, who with the _Metionides_ deposed his elder brother
_Cecrops_, was the father of _Ægeus_, the father of _Theseus_; and
_Metion_, another of his sons, was the father of _Eupalamus_, the father of
_Dædalus_, who was older than _Theseus_; and his daughter _Creusa_ married
_Xuthus_, the son of _Hellen_, and by him had two sons, _Achæus_ and _Ion_;
and _Ion_ commanded the army of the _Athenians_ against the _Eleusinians_,
in the battle in which his grandfather _Erechtheus_ was slain: and this was
just before the institution of the _Eleusinia Sacra_, and before the Reign
of _Pandion_ the father of _Ægeus_. _Erechtheus_ being an _Egyptian_
procured corn from _Egypt_, and for that benefaction was made King of
_Athens_; and near the beginning of his Reign _Ceres_ came into _Attica_
from _Sicily_, in quest of her daughter _Proserpina_. We cannot err much if
we make _Hellen_ contemporary to the Reign of _Saul_, and to that of
_David_ at _Hebron_; and place the beginning of the Reign of _Erechtheus_
in the 25th year, the coming of _Ceres_ into _Attica_ in the 30th year, and
the dispersion of corn by _Triptolemus_ about the 40th year of _David_'s
Reign; and the death of _Ceres_ and _Erechtheus_, and institution of the
_Eleusinia Sacra_, between the tenth and fifteenth year of _Solomon_.

_Teucer_, _Dardanus_, _Erichthonius_, _Tros_, _Ilus_, _Laomedon_, and
_Priamus_ Reigned successively at _Troy_; and their Reigns, at about twenty
years a-piece one with another, amount unto an hundred and forty years:
which counted back from the taking of _Troy_, place the beginning of the
Reign of _Teucer_ about the fifteenth year of the Reign of King _David_;
and that of _Dardanus_, in the days of _Ceres_, who lay with _Jasius_ the
brother of _Dardanus_: whereas Chronologers reckon that the six last of
these Kings Reigned 296 years, which is after the rate of 49⅓ years a-piece
one with another; and that they began their Reign in the days of _Moses_.
_Dardanus_ married the daughter of _Teucer_, the Son of _Scamander_, and
succeeded him: whence _Teucer_ was of about the same age with _David_.

Upon the return of _Sesostris_ into _Egypt_, his brother _Danaus_ not only
attempted his life, as above, but also commanded his daughters, who were
fifty in number and had married the sons of _Sesostris_, to slay their
husbands; and then fled with his daughters from _Egypt_, in a long ship of
fifty oars. This Flight was in the fourteenth year of _Rehoboam_. _Danaus_
came first to _Lindus_, a town in _Rhodes_, and there built a Temple, and
erected a Statue to _Minerva_, and lost three of his daughters by a plague
which raged there; and then sailed thence with the rest of his daughters to
_Argos_. He came to _Argos_ therefore in the fifteenth or sixteenth year of
_Rehoboam_: and at length contending there with _Gelanor_ the brother of
_Eurystheus_ for the crown of _Argos_, was chosen by the people, and
Reigned at _Argos_, while _Eurystheus_ Reigned at _Mycenæ_; and
_Eurystheus_ was born [139] the same year with _Hercules_. _Gelanor_ and
_Eurystheus_ were the sons of _Sthenelus_, by _Nicippe_ the daughter of
_Pelops_; and _Sthenelus_ was the son of _Perseus_, and Reigned at _Argos_,
and _Danaus_, who succeeded him at _Argos_, was succeeded there by his son
in law _Lynceus_, and he by his son _Abas_; that _Abas_ who is commonly,
but erroneously, reputed the father of _Acrisius_ and _Prætus_. In the time
of the _Argonautic_ expedition _Castor_ and _Pollux_ were beardless young
men, and their sisters _Helena_ and _Clytemnestra_ were children, and their
wives _Phœbe_ and _Ilaira_ were also very young: all these, with the
_Argonauts_ _Lynceus_ and _Idas_, were the grandchildren of _Gorgophone_,
the daughter of _Perseus_, the son of _Danae_, the daughter of _Acrisius_
and _Eurydice_; and _Perieres_ and _Oebalus_, the husbands of _Gorgophone_,
were the sons of _Cynortes_, the son of _Amyclas_, the brother of
_Eurydice_. _Mestor_ or _Mastor_, the brother of _Sthenelus_, married
_Lysidice_, another of the daughters of _Pelops_: and _Pelops_ married
_Hippodamia_, the daughter of _Evarete_, the daughter of _Acrisius_.
_Alcmena_, the mother of _Hercules_, was the daughter of _Electryo_; and
_Sthenelus_, _Mestor_ and _Electryo_ were brothers of _Gorgophone_, and
sons of _Perseus_ and _Andromeda_: and the _Argonaut_ _Æsculapius_ was the
grandson of _Leucippus_ and _Phlegia_, and _Leucippus_ was the son of
_Perieres_, the grandson of _Amyclas_ the brother of _Eurydice_, and
_Amyclas_ and _Eurydice_ were the children of _Lacedæmon_ and _Sparta_: and
_Capaneus_, one of the seven Captains against _Thebes_, was the husband of
_Euadne_ the daughter of _Iphis_, the son of _Elector_, the son of
_Anaxagoras_, the son of _Megapenthes_, the son of _Prætus_ the brother of
_Acrisius_. Now from these Generations it may be gathered that _Perseus_,
_Perieres_ and _Anaxagoras_ were of about the same age with _Minos_,
_Pelops_, _Ægeus_ and _Sesac_; and that _Acrisius_, _Prætus_, _Eurydice_,
and _Amyclas_, being two little Generations older, were of about the same
age with King _David_ and _Erechtheus_; and that the Temple of _Juno
Argiva_ was built about the same time with the Temple of _Solomon_; the
same being built by _Eurydice_ to her daughter _Danae_, as above; or as
some say, by _Pirasus_ or _Piranthus_, the son or successor of _Argus_, and
great grandson of _Phoroneus_: for the first Priestess of that Goddess was
_Callithea_ the daughter of _Piranthus_; _Callithea_ was succeeded by
_Alcinoe_, about three Generations before the taking of _Troy_, that is
about the middle of _Solomon_'s Reign: in her Priesthood the _Siculi_
passed out of _Italy_ into _Sicily_: afterwards _Hypermnestra_ the daughter
of _Danaus_ became Priestess of this Goddess, and she flourished in the
times next before the _Argonautic_ expedition: and _Admeta_, the daughter
of _Eurystheus_, was Priestess of this _Juno_ about the times of the
_Trojan_ war. _Andromeda_ the wife of _Perseus_, was the daughter of
_Cepheus_ an _Egyptian_, the son of _Belus_, according to [140]
_Herodotus_; and the _Egyptian_ _Belus_ was _Ammon_: _Perseus_ took her
from _Joppa_, where _Cepheus_, I think a kinsman of _Solomon_'s Queen,
resided in the days of _Solomon_. _Acrisius_ and _Prætus_ were the sons of
_Abas_: but this _Abas_ was not the same man with _Abas_ the grandson of
_Danaus_, but a much older Prince, who built _Abæa_ in _Phocis_, and might
be the Prince from whom the island _Eubœa_ [141] was anciently called
_Abantis_, and the people thereof _Abantes_: for _Apollonius Rhodius_ [142]
tells us, that the _Argonaut_ _Canthus_ was the son of _Canethus_, and that
_Canethus_ was of the posterity of _Abas_; and the Commentator upon
_Apollonius_ tells us further, that from this _Abas_ the inhabitants of
_Eubœa_ were anciently called _Abantes_. This _Abas_ therefore flourished
three or four Generations before the _Argonautic_ expedition, and so might
be the father of _Acrisius_: the ancestors of _Acrisius_ were accounted
_Egyptians_ by the _Greeks_, and they might come from _Egypt_ under _Abas_
into _Eubœa_, and from thence into _Peloponnesus_. I do not reckon
_Phorbas_ and his son _Triopas_ among the Kings of _Argos_, because they
fled from that Kingdom to the Island _Rhodes_; nor do I reckon _Crotopus_
among them, because because he went from _Argos_, and built a new city for
himself in _Megaris_, as [143] _Conon_ relates.

We said that _Pelops_ came into _Greece_ about the 26th year of _Solomon_:
he [144] came thither in the days of _Acrisius_, and in those of
_Endymion_, and of his sons, and took _Ætolia_ from _Aetolus_. _Endymion_
was the son of _Aëthlius_, the son of _Protogenia_, the sister of _Hellen_,
and daughter of _Deucalion_: _Phrixus_ and _Helle_, the children of
_Athamus_, the brother of _Sisyphus_ and Son of _Æolus_, the son of
_Hellen_, fled from their stepmother _Ino_, the daughter of _Cadmus_, to
_Æetes_ in _Colchis_, presently after the return of _Sesostris_ into
_Egypt_: and _Jason_ the _Argonaut_ was the son of _Æson_, the son of
_Cretheus_, the son of _Æolus_, the son of _Hellen_: and _Calyce_ was the
wife of _Aëthlius_, and mother of _Endymion_, and daughter of _Æolus_, and
sister of _Cretheus_, _Sisyphus_ and _Athamas_: and by these circumstances
_Cretheus_, _Sisyphus_ and _Athamas_ flourished in the latter part of the
Reign of _Solomon_, and in the Reign of _Rehoboam_: _Aëthlius_, _Æolus_,
_Xuthus_, _Dorus_, _Tantalus_, and _Danae_ were contemporary to
_Erechtheus_, _Jasius_ and _Cadmus_; and _Hellen_ was about one, and
_Deucalion_ about two Generations older than _Erechtheus_. They could not
be much older, because _Xuthus_ the youngest son of _Hellen_ [145] married
_Creusa_ the daughter of _Erechtheus_; nor could they be much younger,
because _Cephalus_ the son of _Deioneus_, the son of _Æolus_, the eldest
son of _Hellen_, [146] married _Procris_ the daughter of _Erechtheus_; and
_Procris_ fled from her husband to _Minos_. Upon the death of _Hellen_, his
youngest son _Xuthus_ [147] was expelled _Thessaly_ by his brothers _Æolus_
and _Dorus_, and fled to _Erechtheus_, and married _Creusa_ the daughter of
_Erechtheus_; by whom he had two sons, _Achæus_ and _Ion_, the youngest of
which grew up before the death of _Erechtheus_, and commanded the army of
the _Athenians_, in the war in which _Erechtheus_ was slain: and therefore
_Hellen_ died about one Generation before _Erechtheus_.

_Sisyphus_ therefore built _Corinth_ about the latter end of the Reign of
_Solomon_, or the beginning of the Reign of _Rehoboam_. Upon the flight of
_Phrixus_ and _Helle_, their father _Athamas_, a little King in _Bœotia_,
went distracted and slew his son _Learchus_; and his wife _Ino_ threw her
self into the sea, together with her other son _Melicertus_; and thereupon
_Sisyphus_ instituted the _Isthmia_ at _Corinth_ to his nephew
_Melicertus_. This was presently after _Sesostris_ had left _Æetes_ in
_Colchis_, I think in the fifteenth or sixteenth year of _Rehoboam_: so
that _Athamas_, the son of _Æolus_ and grandson of _Hellen_, and _Ino_ the
daughter of _Cadmus_, flourished 'till about the sixteenth year of
_Rehoboam_. _Sisyphus_ and his successors _Ornytion_, _Thoas_, _Demophon_,
_Propodas_, _Doridas_, and _Hyanthidas_ Reigned successively at _Corinth_,
'till the return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_: then Reigned the
_Heraclides_, _Aletes_, _Ixion_, _Agelas_, _Prumnis_, _Bacchis_, _Agelas
II_, _Eudamus_, _Aristodemus_, and _Telestes_ successively about 170 years,
and then _Corinth_ was governed by _Prytanes_ or annual Archons about 42
years, and after them by _Cypselus_ and _Periander_ about 48 years more.

_Celeus_ King of _Eleusis_, who was contemporary to _Erechtheus_, [148] was
the son of _Rharus_, the son of _Cranaus_, the successor of _Cecrops_; and
in the Reign of _Cranaus_, _Deucalion_ fled with his sons _Hellen_ and
_Amphictyon_ from the flood which then overflowed _Thessaly_, and was
called _Deucalion_'s flood: they fled into _Attica_, and there _Deucalion_
died soon after; and _Pausanias_ tells us that his Sepulchre was to be seen
near _Athens_. His eldest son _Hellen_ succeeded him in _Thessaly_, and his
other son _Amphictyon_ married the daughter of _Cranaus_, and Reigning at
_Thermopylæ_, erected there the _Amphictyonic_ Council; and _Acrisius_ soon
after erected the like Council at _Delphi_. This I conceive was done when
_Amphictyon_ and _Acrisius_ were aged, and fit to be Counsellors; suppose
in the latter half of the Reign of _David_, and beginning of the Reign of
_Solomon_; and soon after, suppose about the middle of the Reign of
_Solomon_, did _Phemonoë_ become the first Priestess of _Apollo_ at
_Delphi_, and gave Oracles in hexameter verse: and then was _Acrisius_
slain accidentally by his grandson _Perseus_. The Council of _Thermopylæ_
included twelve nations of the _Greeks_, without _Attica_, and therefore
_Amphictyon_ did not then Reign at _Athens_: he might endeavour to succeed
_Cranaus_, his wife's father, and be prevented by _Erechtheus_.

Between the Reigns of _Cranaus_ and _Erechtheus_, Chronologers place also
_Erichthonius_, and his son _Pandion_; but I take this _Erichthonius_ and
this his son _Pandion_, to be the same with _Erechtheus_ and his son and
successor _Pandion_, the names being only repeated with a little variation
in the list of the Kings of _Attica_: for _Erichthonius_, he that was the
son of the Earth, nursed up by _Minerva_, is by _Homer_ called
_Erechtheus_; and _Themistius_ [149] tells us, that it was _Erechtheus_
that first joyned a chariot to horses; and _Plato_ [150] alluding to the
story of _Erichthonius_ in a basket, saith, _The people of magnanimous
_Erechtheus_ is beautiful, but it behoves us to behold him taken out_:
_Erechtheus_ therefore immediately succeeded _Cranaus_, while _Amphictyon_
Reigned at _Thermopylæ_. In the Reign of _Cranaus_ the Poets place the
flood of _Deucalion_, and therefore the death of _Deucalion_, and the Reign
of his sons _Hellen_ and _Amphictyon_, in _Thessaly_ and _Thermpolyæ_, was
but a few years, suppose eight or ten, before the Reign of _Erechtheus_.

The first Kings of _Arcadia_ were successively _Pelasgus_, _Lycaon_,
_Nyctimus_, _Arcas_, _Clitor_, _Æpytus_, _Aleus_, _Lycurgus_, _Echemus_,
_Agapenor_, _Hippothous_, _Æpytus_ II, _Cypselus_, _Olæas_, &c. Under
_Cypselus_ the _Heraclides_ returned into _Peloponnesus_, as above:
_Agapenor_ was one of those who courted _Helena_; he courted her before he
reigned, and afterwards he went to the war at _Troy_, and thence to
_Cyprus_, and there built _Paphos_. _Echemus_ slew _Hyllus_ the son of
_Hercules._ _Lycurgus_, _Cepheus_, and _Auge_, were [151] the children of
_Aleus_, the son of _Aphidas_, the son of _Arcas_, the son of _Callisto_,
the daughter of _Lycaon_: _Auge_ lay with _Hercules_, and _Ancæus_ the son
of _Lycurgus_ was an _Argonaut_, and his uncle _Cepheus_ was his Governour
in that Expedition; and _Lycurgus_ stay'd at home, to look after his aged
father _Aleus_, who might be born about 75 years before that Expedition;
and his grandfather _Arcas_ might be born about the end of the Reign of
_Saul_, and _Lycaon_ the grandfather of _Arcas_ might be then alive, and
dye before the middle of _David_'s Reign; and His youngest son _Oenotrus_,
the _Janus_ of the _Latines_, might grow up, and lead a colony into _Italy_
before the Reign of _Solomon_. _Arcas_ received [152] bread-corn from
_Triptolemus_, and taught his people to make bread of it; and so did
_Eumelus_, the first King of a region afterwards called _Achaia_: and
therefore _Arcas_ and _Eumelus_ were contemporary to _Triptolemus_, and to
his old father _Celeus_, and to _Erechtheus_ King of _Athens_; and
_Callisto_ to _Rharus_, and her father _Lycaon_ to _Cranaus_: but _Lycaon_
died before _Cranaus_, so as to leave room for _Deucalion_'s flood between
their deaths. The eleven Kings of _Arcadia_, between this Flood and the
Return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_, that is, between the Reigns
of _Lycaon_ and _Cypselus_, after the rate of about twenty years to a Reign
one with another, took up about 220 years; and these years counted back
from the Return of the _Heraclides_, place the Flood of _Deucalion_ upon
the fourteenth year of _David_'s Reign, or thereabout.

_Herodotus_ [153] tells us, that the _Phœnicians_ who came with _Cadmus_
brought many doctrines into _Greece_: for amongst those _Phœnicians_ were a
sort of men called _Curetes_, who were skilled in the Arts and Sciences of
_Phœnicia_, above other men, and [154] settled some in _Phrygia_, where
they were called _Corybantes_; some in _Crete_, where they were called
_Idæi Dactyli_; some in _Rhodes_, where they were called _Telchines_; some
in _Samothrace_, where they were called _Cabiri_; some in _Eubœa_, where,
before the invention of iron, they wrought in copper, in a city thence
called _Chalcis_ some in _Lemnos_, where they assisted _Vulcan_; and some
in _Imbrus_, and other places: and a considerable number of them settled in
_Ætolia_, which was thence called the country of the _Curetes_; until
_Ætolus_ the son of _Endymion_, having slain _Apis_ King of _Sicyon_, fled
thither, and by the assistance of his father invaded it, and from his own
name called it _Ætolia_: and by the assistance of these artificers,
_Cadmus_ found out gold in the mountain _Pangæus_ in _Thrace_, and copper
at _Thebes_; whence copper ore is still called _Cadmia_. Where they settled
they wrought first in copper, 'till iron was invented, and then in iron;
and when they had made themselves armour, they danced in it at the
sacrifices with tumult and clamour, and bells, and pipes, and drums, and
swords, with which they struck upon one another's armour, in musical times,
appearing seized with a divine fury; and this is reckoned the original of
music in _Greece:_ so _Solinus_ [155] _Studium musicum inde cœptum cum Idæi
Dactyli modulos crepitu & tinnitu æris deprehensos in versificum ordinem
transtulissent_: and [156] _Isidorus_, _Studium musicum ab Idæis Dactylis
cœptum_. _Apollo_ and the Muses were two Generations later. _Clemens_ [157]
calls the _Idæi Dactyli_ barbarous, that is strangers; and saith, that they
reputed the first wise men, to whom both the letters which they call
_Ephesian_, and the invention of musical rhymes are referred: it seems that
when the _Phœnician_ letters, ascribed to _Cadmus_, were brought into
_Greece_, they were at the same time brought into _Phrygia_ and _Crete_, by
the _Curetes_; who settled in those countries, and called them _Ephesian_,
from the city _Ephesus_, where they were first taught. The _Curetes_, by
their manufacturing copper and iron, and making swords, and armour, and
edged tools for hewing and carving of wood, brought into _Europe_ a new way
of fighting; and gave _Minos_ an opportunity of building a Fleet, and
gaining the dominion of the seas; and set on foot the trades of Smiths and
Carpenters in _Greece_, which are the foundation of manual trades: the
[158] fleet of _Minos_ was without sails, and _Dædalus_ fled from him by
adding sails to his vessel; and therefore ships with sails were not used by
the _Greeks_ before the flight of _Dædalus_, and death of _Minos_, who was
slain in pursuing him to _Sicily_, in the Reign of _Rehoboam_. _Dædalus_
and his nephew _Talus_, in the latter part of the Reign of _Solomon_,
invented the chip-ax, and saw, and wimble, and perpendicular, and compass,
and turning-lath, and glew, and the potter's wheel; and his father
_Eupalamus_ invented the anchor: and these things gave a beginning to
manual Arts and Trades in _Europe_.

The [159] _Curetes_, who thus introduced Letters, and Music, and Poetry,
and Dancing, and Arts, and attended on the Sacrifices, were no less active
about religious institutions, and for their skill and knowledge and
mystical practices, were accounted wise men and conjurers by the vulgar. In
_Phrygia_ their mysteries were about _Rhea_, called _Magna Mater_, and from
the places where she was worshipped, _Cybele_, _Berecynthia_,
_Pessinuntia_, _Dindymene_, _Mygdonia_, and _Idæa Phrygia_: and in _Crete_,
and the _Terra Curetum_, they were about _Jupiter Olympius_, the son of the
_Cretan Rhea_: they represented, [160] that when _Jupiter_ was born in
_Crete_, his mother _Rhea_ caused him to be educated in a cave in mount
_Ida_, under their care and tuition; and [161] that they danced about him
in armour, with great noise, that his father _Saturn_ might not hear him
cry; and when he was grown up, assisted him in conquering his father, and
his father's friends; and in memory of these things instituted their
mysteries. _Bochart_ [162] brings them from _Palestine_, and thinks that
they had the name of _Curetes_ from the people among the _Philistims_
called _Crethim_, or _Cerethites_: _Ezek._ xxv. 16. _Zeph._ ii. 5. 1 _Sam._
xxx. 14, for the _Philistims_ conquered _Zidon_, and mixed with the
_Zidonians_.

The two first Kings of _Crete_, who reigned after the coming of the
_Curetes_, were _Asterius_ and _Minos_; and _Europa_ was the Queen of
_Asterius_, and mother of _Minos_; and the _Idæan Curetes_ were her
countrymen, and came with her and her brother _Alymnus_ into _Crete_, and
dwelt in the _Idæan_ cave in her Reign, and there educated _Jupiter_, and
found out iron, and made armour: and therefore these three, _Asterius_,
_Europa_, and _Minos_, must be the _Saturn_, _Rhea_ and _Jupiter_ of the
_Cretans_. _Minos_ is usually called the son of _Jupiter_; but this is in
relation to the fable, that _Jupiter_ in the shape of a bull, the Ensign of
the Ship, carried away _Europa_ from _Zidon_: for the _Phœnicians_, upon
their first coming into _Greece_, gave the name of _Jao-pater_, _Jupiter_,
to every King: and thus both _Minos_ and his father were _Jupiters_.
_Echemenes_, an ancient author cited by _Athenæus_, [163] said that _Minos_
was that _Jupiter_ who committed the rape upon _Ganimede_; though others
said more truly that it was _Tantalus_: _Minos_ alone was that _Jupiter_
who was most famous among the _Greeks_ for Dominion and Justice, being the
greatest King in all _Greece_ in those days, and the only legislator.
_Plutarch_ [164] tells us, that the people of _Naxus_, contrary to what
others write, pretended that there were two _Minos's_, and two _Ariadnes_;
and that the first _Ariadne_ married _Bacchus_, and the last was carried
away by _Theseus_: but [165] _Homer_, _Hesiod_, _Thucydides_, _Herodotus_,
and _Strabo_, knew but of one _Minos_; and _Homer_ describes him to be the
son of _Jupiter_ and _Europa_, and the brother of _Rhadamanthus_ and
_Sarpedon_, and the father of _Deucalion_ the _Argonaut_, and grandfather
of _Idomeneus_ who warred at _Troy_, and that he was the legislator of
Hell: _Herodotus_ [166] makes _Minos_ and _Rhadamanthus_ the sons of
_Europa_, contemporary to _Ægeus_: and [167] _Apollodorus_ and _Hyginus_
say, that _Minos_, the father of _Androgeus_, _Ariadne_ and _Phædra_, was
the son of _Jupiter_ and _Europa_, and brother of _Rhadamanthus_ and
_Sarpedon_.

_Lucian_ [168] lets us know that _Europa_ the mother of _Minos_ was
worshipped by the name of _Rhea_, the form of a woman sitting in a chariot
drawn by lions, with a drum in her hand, and a _Corona turrita_ on her
head, like _Astarte_ and _Isis_; and the _Cretans_ [169] anciently shewed
the house where this _Rhea_ lived: and [170] _Apollonius Rhodius_ tells us,
that _Saturn_, while he Reigned over the _Titans_ in _Olympus_, a mountain
in _Crete_, and _Jupiter_ was educated by the _Curetes_ in the _Cretan_
cave, deceived _Rhea_, and of _Philyra_ begot _Chiron_: and therefore the
_Cretan Saturn_ and _Rhea_, were but one Generation older than _Chiron_,
and by consequence not older than _Asterius_ and _Europa_, the parents of
_Minos_; for _Chiron_ lived 'till after the _Argonautic_ Expedition, and
had two grandsons in that Expedition, and _Europa_ came into _Crete_ above
an hundred years before that Expedition: _Lucian_ [171] tells us, that the
_Cretans_ did not only relate, that _Jupiter_ was born and buried among
them, but also shewed his sepulchre: and _Porphyry_ [172] tells us, that
_Pythagoras_ went down into the _Idæan_ cave, to see sepulchre: and
_Cicero_, [173] in numbering three _Jupiters_, saith, that the third was
the _Cretan Jupiter_, _Saturn_'s son, whose sepulchre was shewed in
_Crete_: and the Scholiast upon _Callimachus_ [174] lets us know, that this
was the sepulchre of _Minos_: his words are, Εν Κρητη επι τωι ταφωι του
Μινωος επεγεγραπτο, ΜΙΝΩΟΣ ΤΟΥ ΔΙΟΣ ΤΑΦΟΣ. τωι χρονωι δε του Μινωος
απηλειφθη, ‛ωστε περιλειφθηναι, ΔΙΟΣ ΤΑΦΟΣ. εκ τουτου ουν εχειν λεγουσι
Κρητες τον ταφον του Διος. _In _Crete_ upon the Sepulchre of _Minos_ was
written _Minois Jovis sepulchrum_: but in time _Minois_ wore out so that
there remained only, _Jovis sepulchrum_, and thence the _Cretans_ called it
the Sepulchre of _Jupiter__. By _Saturn_, _Cicero_, who was a _Latine_,
understood the _Saturn_ so called by the _Latines_: for when _Saturn_ was
expelled his Kingdom he fled from _Crete_ by sea, to _Italy_; and this the
Poets exprest by saying, that _Jupiter_ cast him down to _Tartarus_, that
is, into the Sea: and because he lay hid in _Italy_, the _Latines_ called
him _Saturn_; and _Italy_, _Saturnia_, and _Latium_, and themselves
_Latines_: so [175] _Cyprian_; _Antrum Jovis in Creta visitur, & sepulchrum
ejus ostenditur: & ab eo Saturnum fugatum esse manifestum est: unde Latium
de latebra ejus nomen accepit: hic literas imprimere, hic signare nummos in
Italia primus instituit, unde ærarium Saturni vocatur; & rusticitatis hic
cultor fuit, inde falcem ferens senex pingitur:_ and _Minutius Felix_;
_Saturnus Creta profugus, Italiam metu filii sævientis accesserat, & Jani
susceptus hospitio, rudes illos homines & agrestes multa docuit, ut
Græculus & politus, literas imprimere, nummos signare, instrumenta
conficere: itaque latebram suam, quod tuto latuisset, vocari maluit Latium,
& urbem Saturniam de suo nomine. * * Ejus filius Jupiter Cretæ excluso
parente regnavit, illic obiit, illic filios habuit; adhuc antrum Jovis
visitur, & sepulchrum ejus ostenditur, & ipsis sacris suis humanitatis
arguitur_: and _Tertullian_; [176] _Quantum rerum argumenta docent, nusquam
invenio fideliora quam apud ipsam Italiam, in qua Saturnus post multas
expeditiones, postque Attica hospitia consedit, exceptus ab Jano, vel Jane
ut Salii volunt. Mons quem incoluerat Saturnius dictus: civitas quam
depalaverat Saturnia usque nunc est. Tota denique Italia post Oenotriam
Saturnia cognominabatur. Ab ipso primum tabulæ, & imagine signatus nummus,
& inde ærario præsidet_. By _Saturn_'s carrying letters into _Italy_, and
coyning money, and teaching agriculture, and making instruments, and
building a town, you may know that he fled from _Crete_, after letters, and
the coyning of money, and manual arts were brought into _Europe_ by the
_Phœnicians_; and from _Attica_, after agriculture was brought into
_Greece_ by _Ceres_; and so could not be older than _Asterius_, and
_Europa_, and her brother _Cadmus_: and by _Italy_'s being called
_Oenotria_, before it was called _Saturnia_, you may know that he came into
_Italy_ after _Oenotrus_, and so was not older than the sons of _Lycaon_.
_Oenotrus_ carried the first colony of the _Greeks_ into _Italy_, _Saturn_
the second, and _Evander_ the third; and the _Latines_ know nothing older
in _Italy_ than _Janus_ and _Saturn_: and therefore _Oenotrus_ was the
_Janus_ of the _Latines_, and _Saturn_ was contemporary to the sons of
_Lycaon_, and by consequence also to _Celeus_, _Erechtheus_, _Ceres_, and
_Asterius_: for _Ceres_ educated _Triptolemus_ the son of _Celeus_, in the
Reign of _Erechtheus_, and then taught him to plow and sow corn: _Arcas_
the son of _Callisto_, and grandson of _Lycaon_, received corn from
_Triptolemus_, and taught his people to make bread of it; and _Procris_,
the daughter of _Erechtheus_, fled to _Minos_ the son of _Asterius_. In
memory of _Saturn_'s coming into _Italy_ by sea, the _Latines_ coined their
first money with his head on one side, and a ship on the other. _Macrobius_
[177] tells us, that when _Saturn_ was dead, _Janus_ erected an Altar to
him, with sacred rites as to a God, and instituted the _Saturnalia_, and
that humane sacrifices were offered to him; 'till _Hercules_ driving the
cattle of _Geryon_ through _Italy_, abolished that custom: by the human
sacrifices you may know that _Janus_ was of the race of _Lycaon_; which
character agrees to _Oenotrus_. _Dionysius Halicarnassensis_ tells us
further, that _Oenotrus_ having found in the western parts of _Italy_ a
large region fit for pasturage and tillage, but yet for the most part
uninhabited, and where it was inhabited, peopled but thinly; in a certain
part of it, purged from the _Barbarians_, he built towns little and
numerous, in the mountains; which manner of building was familiar to the
ancients: and this was the Original of Towns in _Italy_.

_Pausanias_ [178] tells us that _the people of _Elis_, who were best
skilled in Antiquities, related this to have been the Original of the
Olympic Games: that _Saturn_ Reigned first and had a Temple built to him in
_Olympia_ by the men of the Golden Age; and that when _Jupiter_ was newly
born, his mother _Rhea_ recommended him to the care of the _Idæi Dactyli_,
who were also called _Curetes_: that afterwards five of them, called
_Hercules_, _Pœonius_, _Epimedes_, _Jasius_, and _Ida_, came from _Ida_, a
mountain in _Crete_, into _Elis_; and _Hercules_, called also _Hercules
Idæus_, being the oldest of them, in memory of the war between _Saturn_ and
_Jupiter_, instituted the game of racing, and that the victor should be
rewarded with a crown of olive_; and there erected an altar to _Jupiter
Olympius_, and called these games Olympic: and that some of the _Eleans_
said, _that _Jupiter_ contended here with _Saturn_ for the Kingdom; others
that _Hercules Idæus_ instituted these games in memory of their victory
over the _Titans__: for the people of _Arcadia_ [179] had a tradition, that
the Giants fought with the Gods in the valley of _Bathos_, near the river
_Alpheus_ and the fountain _Olympias_. [180] Before the Reign of
_Asterius_, his father _Teutamus_ came into _Crete_ with a colony from
_Olympia_; and upon the flight of _Asterius_, some of his friends might
retire with him into their own country, and be pursued and beaten there by
the _Idæan Hercules_: the _Eleans_ said also that _Clymenus_ the grandson
of the _Idæan Hercules_, about fifty years after _Deucalion_'s flood,
coming from _Crete_, celebrated these games again in _Olympia_, and erected
there an altar to _Juno Olympia_, that is, to _Europa_, and another to this
_Hercules_ and the rest of the _Curetes_; and Reigned in _Elis_ 'till he
was expelled by _Endymion_, [181] who thereupon celebrated these games
again: and so did _Pelops_, who expelled _Ætolus_ the son of _Endymion_;
and so also did _Hercules_ the son of _Alcmena_, and _Atreus_ the son of
_Pelops_, and _Oxylus_: they might be celebrated originally in triumph for
victories, first by _Hercules Idæus_, upon the conquest of _Saturn_ and the
_Titans_, and then by _Clymenus_, upon his coming to Reign in the _Terra
Curetum_; then by _Endymion_, upon his conquering _Clymenus_; and
afterwards by _Pelops_, upon his conquering _Ætolus_; and by _Hercules_,
upon his killing _Augeas_; and by _Atreus_, upon his repelling the
_Heraclides_; and by _Oxylus_, upon the return of the _Heraclides_ into
_Peloponnesus_. This _Jupiter_, to whom they were instituted, had a Temple
and Altar erected to him in _Olympia_, where the games were celebrated, and
from the place was called _Jupiter Olympius_: _Olympia_ was a place upon
the confines of _Pisa_, near the river _Alpheus_.

In the [182] Island _Thasus_, where _Cadmus_ left his brother _Thasus_, the
_Phœnicians_ built a Temple to _Hercules Olympius_, that _Hercules_, whom
_Cicero_ [183] calls _ex Idæis Dactylis; cui inferias afferunt_. When the
mysteries of _Ceres_ were instituted in _Eleusis_, there were other
mysteries instituted to her and her daughter and daughter's husband, in the
Island _Samothrace_, by the _Phœnician_ names of _Dii Cabiri Axieros_,
_Axiokersa_, and _Axiokerses_, that is, the great Gods _Ceres_,
_Proserpina_ and _Pluto_: for [184] _Jasius_ a _Samothracian_, whose sister
married _Cadmus_, was familiar with _Ceres_; and _Cadmus_ and _Jasius_ were
both of them instituted in these mysteries. _Jasius_ was the brother of
_Dardanus_, and married _Cybele_ the daughter of _Meones_ King of
_Phrygia_, and by her had _Corybas_; and after his death, _Dardanus_,
_Cybele_ and _Corybas_ went into _Phrygia_, and carried thither the
mysteries of the mother of the Gods, and _Cybele_ called the goddess after
her own name, and _Corybas_ called her priests _Corybantes_: thus
_Diodorus_; but _Dionysius_ saith [185] that _Dardanus_ instituted the
_Samothracian_ mysteries, and that his wife _Chryses_ learnt them in
_Arcadia_, and that _Idæus_ the son of _Dardanus_ instituted afterwards the
mysteries of the mother of the gods in _Phrygia_: this _Phrygian_ Goddess
was drawn in a chariot by lions, and had a _corona turrita_ on her head,
and a drum in her hand, like the _Phœnician_ Goddess _Astarte_, and the
_Corybantes_ danced in armour at her sacrifices in a furious manner, like
the _Idæi Dactyli_; and _Lucian_ [186] tells us that she was the _Cretan
Rhea_, that is, _Europa_ the mother of _Minos_: and thus the _Phœnicians_
introduced the practice of Deifying dead men and women among the _Greeks_
and _Phrygians_; for I meet with no instance of Deifying dead men and women
in _Greece_, before the coming of _Cadmus_ and _Europa_ from _Zidon_.

From these originals it came into fashion among the _Greeks_, κτεριζειν,
_parentare_, to celebrate the funerals of dead parents with festivals and
invocations and sacrifices offered to their ghosts, and to erect
magnificent sepulchres in the form of temples, with altars and statues, to
persons of renown; and there to honour them publickly with sacrifices and
invocations: every man might do it to his ancestors; and the cities of
_Greece_ did it to all the eminent _Greeks_: as to _Europa_ the sister, to
_Alymnus_ the brother, and to _Minos_ and _Rhadamanthus_ the nephews of
_Cadmus_; to his daughter _Ino_, and her son _Melicertus_; to _Bacchus_ the
son of his daughter _Semele_, _Aristarchus_ the husband of his daughter
_Autonoe_, and _Jasius_ the brother of his wife _Harmonia_; to _Hercules_ a
_Theban_, and his mother _Alcmena_; to _Danae_ the daughter of _Acrisius_;
to _Æsculapius_ and _Polemocrates_ the son of _Machaon_, to _Pandion_ and
_Theseus_ Kings of _Athens_, _Hippolytus_ the son of _Theseus_, _Pan_ the
son of _Penelope_, _Proserpina_, _Triptolemus_, _Celeus_, _Trophonius_,
_Castor_, _Pollux_, _Helena_, _Menelaus_, _Agamemnon_, _Amphiaraus_ and his
son _Amphilochus_, _Hector_ and _Alexandra_ the son and daughter of
_Priam_, _Phoroneus_, _Orpheus_, _Protesilaus_, _Achilles_ and his mother
_Thetis_, _Ajax_, _Arcas_, _Idomeneus_, _Meriones_, _Æacus_, _Melampus_,
_Britomartis_, _Adrastus_, _Iolaus_, and divers others. They Deified their
dead in divers manners, according to their abilities and circumstances, and
the merits of the person; some only in private families, as houshold Gods
or _Dii Pænates_; others by erecting gravestones to them in publick, to be
used as altars for annual sacrifices; others, by building also to them
sepulchres in the form of houses or temples; and some by appointing
mysteries, and ceremonies, and set sacrifices, and festivals, and
initiations, and a succession of priests for performing those institutions
in the temples, and handing them down to posterity. Altars might begin to
be erected in _Europe_ a little before the days of _Cadmus_, for
sacrificing to the old God or Gods of the Colonies, but Temples began in
the days of _Solomon_; for [187] _Æacus_ the son of _Ægina_, who was two
Generations older than the _Trojan_ war, is by some reputed one of the
first who built a Temple in _Greece_. Oracles came first from _Egypt_ into
_Greece_ about the same time, as also did the custom of forming the images
of the Gods with their legs bound up in the shape of the _Egyptian_
mummies: for Idolatry began in _Chaldæa_ and _Egypt_, and spread thence
into _Phœnicia_ and the neighbouring countries, long before it came into
_Europe_; and the _Pelasgians_ propagated it in _Greece_, by the dictates
of the Oracles. The countries upon the _Tigris_ and the _Nile_ being
exceeding fertile, were first frequented by mankind, and grew first into
Kingdoms, and therefore began first to adore their dead Kings and Queens:
hence came the Gods of _Laban_, the Gods and Goddesses called _Baalim_ and
_Ashtaroth_ by the _Canaanites_, the Dæmons or Ghosts to whom they
sacrificed, and the _Moloch_ to whom they offered their children in the
days of _Moses_ and the Judges. Every City set up the worship of its own
Founder and Kings, and by alliances and conquests they spread this worship,
and at length the _Phœnicians_ and _Egyptians_ brought into _Europe_ the
practice of Deifying the dead. The Kingdom of the lower _Egypt_ began to
worship their Kings before the days of _Moses_; and to this worship the
second commandment is opposed: when the Shepherds invaded the lower
_Egypt_, they checked this worship of the old _Egyptians_, and spread that
of their own Kings: and at length the _Egyptians_ of _Coptos_ and
_Thebais_, under _Misphragmuthosis_ and _Amosis_, expelling the Shepherds,
checked the worship of the Gods of the Shepherds, and Deifying their own
Kings and Princes, propagated the worship of twelve of them into their
conquests; and made them more universal than the false Gods of any other
nation had been before, so as to be called, _Dii magni majorum gentium_.
_Sesostris_ conquered _Thrace_, and _Amphictyon_ the son of _Prometheus_
brought the twelve Gods from _Thrace_ into _Greece_: _Herodotus_ [188]
tells us that they came from _Egypt_; and by the names of the cities of
_Egypt_ dedicated to many of these Gods, you may know that they were of an
_Egyptian_ original: and the _Egyptians_, according to _Diodorus_, [189]
usually represented, that after their _Saturn_ and _Rhea_, Reigned
_Jupiter_ and _Juno_, the parents of _Osiris_ and _Isis_, the parents of
_Orus_ and _Bubaste_.

By all this it may be understood, that as the _Egyptians_ who Deified their
Kings, began their monarchy with the Reign of their Gods and Heroes,
reckoning _Menes_ the first man who reigned after their Gods; so the
_Cretans_ had the Ages of their Gods and Heroes, calling the first four
Ages of their Deified Kings and Princes, the Golden, Silver, Brazen, and
Iron Ages. _Hesiod_ [190] describing these four Ages of the Gods and
Demi-Gods of _Greece_, represents them to be four Generations of men, each
of which ended when the men then living grew old and dropt into the grave,
and tells us that the fourth ended with the wars of _Thebes_ and _Troy_:
and so many Generations there were, from the coming of the _Phœnicians_ and
_Curetes_ with _Cadmus_ and _Europa_ into _Greece_ unto the destruction of
_Troy_. _Apollonius Rhodius_ saith that when the _Argonauts_ came to
_Crete_, they slew _Talus_ a brazen man, who remained of those that were of
the Brazen Age, and guarded that pass: _Talus_ was reputed [191] the son of
_Minos_, and therefore the sons of _Minos_ lived in the Brazen Age, and
_Minos_ Reigned in the Silver Age: it was the Silver Age of the _Greeks_ in
which they began to plow and sow Corn, and _Ceres_, that taught them to do
it, flourished in the Reign of _Celeus_ and _Erechtheus_ and _Minos_.
Mythologists tell us that the last woman with whom _Jupiter_ lay, was
_Alcmena_; and thereby they seem to put an end to the Reign of _Jupiter_
among mortals, that is to the Silver Age, when _Alcmena_ was with child of
_Hercules_; who therefore was born about the eighth or tenth year of
_Rehoboam's_ Reign, and was about 34 years old at the time of the
_Argonautic_ expedition. _Chiron_ was begot by _Saturn_ of _Philyra_ in the
Golden Age, when _Jupiter_ was a child in the _Cretan_ cave, as above; and
this was in the Reign of _Asterius_ King of _Crete_: and therefore
_Asterius_ Reigned in _Crete_ in the Golden Age; and the Silver Age began
when _Chiron_ was a child: if _Chiron_ was born about the 35th year of
_David_'s Reign, he will be born in the Reign of _Asterius_, when _Jupiter_
was a child in the _Cretan_ cave, and be about 88 years old in the time of
the _Argonautic_ expedition, when he invented the Asterisms; and this is
within the reach of nature. The Golden Age therefore falls in with the
Reign of _Asterius_, and the Silver Age with that of _Minos_; and to make
these Ages much longer than ordinary generations, is to make _Chiron_ live
much longer than according to the course of nature. This fable of the four
Ages seems to have been made by the _Curetes_ in the fourth Age, in memory
of the first four Ages of their coming into _Europe_, as into a new world;
and in honour of their country-woman _Europa_, and her husband _Asterius_
the _Saturn_ of the _Latines_, and of her son _Minos_ the _Cretan Jupiter_
and grandson _Deucalion_, who Reigned 'till the _Argonautic_ expedition,
and is sometimes reckoned among the _Argonauts_, and of their great
grandson _Idomeneus_ who warred at _Troy_. _Hesiod_ tells us that he
himself lived in the fifth Age, the Age next after the taking of _Troy_,
and therefore he flourished within thirty or thirty five years after it:
and _Homer_ was of about the same Age; for he [192] lived sometime with
_Mentor_ in _Ithaca_, and there learnt of him many things concerning
_Ulysses_, with whom _Mentor_ had been personally acquainted: now
_Herodotus_, the oldest Historian of the _Greeks_ now extant, [193] tells
us that _Hesiod_ and _Homer_ were not above four hundred years older than
himself, and therefore they flourished within 110 or 120 years after the
death of _Solomon_; and according to my reckoning the taking of _Troy_ was
but one Generation earlier.

Mythologists tell us, that _Niobe_ the daughter of _Phoroneus_ was the
first woman with whom _Jupiter_ lay, and that of her he begat _Argus_, who
succeeded _Phoroneus_ in the Kingdom of _Argos_, and gave his name to that
city; and therefore _Argus_ was born in the beginning of the Silver Age:
unless you had rather say that by _Jupiter_ they might here mean
_Asterius_; for the _Phœnicians_ gave the name of _Jupiter_ to every King,
from the time of their first coming into _Greece_ with _Cadmus_ and
_Europa_, until the invasion of _Greece_ by _Sesostris_, and the birth of
_Hercules_, and particularly to the fathers of _Minos_, _Pelops_,
_Lacedæmon_, _Æacus_, and _Perseus_.

The four first Ages succeeded the flood of _Deucalion_; and some tell us
that _Deucalion_ was the son of _Prometheus_, the son of _Japetus_, and
brother of _Atlas_: but this was another _Deucalion_; for _Japetus_ the
father of _Prometheus_, _Epimetheus,_ and _Atlas_, was an _Egyptian_, the
brother of _Osiris_, and flourished two generations after the flood of
_Deucalion_.

I have now carried up the Chronology of the _Greeks_ as high as to the
first use of letters, the first plowing and sowing of corn, the first
manufacturing of copper and iron, the beginning of the trades of Smiths,
Carpenters, Joyners, Turners, Brick-makers, Stone-cutters, and Potters, in
_Europe_; the first walling of cities about, the first building of Temples,
and the original of Oracles in _Greece_; the beginning of navigation by the
Stars in long ships with sails; the erecting of the _Amphictyonic_ Council;
the first Ages of _Greece_, called the Golden, Silver, Brazen and Iron
Ages, and the flood of _Deucalion_ which immediately preceded them. Those
Ages could not be earlier than the invention and use of the four metals in
_Greece_, from whence they had their names; and the flood of _Ogyges_ could
not be much above two or three ages earlier than that of _Deucalion_: for
among such wandering people as were then in _Europe_, there could be no
memory of things done above three or four ages before the first use of
letters: and the expulsion of the Shepherds out of _Egypt_, which gave the
first occasion to the coming of people from _Egypt_ into _Greece_, and to
the building of houses and villages in _Greece_, was scarce earlier than
the days of _Eli_ and _Samuel_; for _Manetho_ tells us, that when they were
forced to quit _Abaris_ and retire out of _Egypt_, they went through the
wilderness into _Judæa_ and built _Jerusalem_: I do not think, with
_Manetho,_ that they were the _Israelites_ under _Moses_, but rather
believe that they were _Canaanites_; and upon leaving _Abaris_ mingled with
the _Philistims_ their next neighbours: though some of them might assist
_David_ and _Solomon_ in building _Jerusalem_ and the Temple.

_Saul_ was made King [194], that he might rescue _Israel_ out of the hand
of the _Philistims_, who opressed them; and in the second year of his
Reign, the _Philistims_ brought into the field against him _thirty thousand
chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and people as the sand which is on the
sea shore for multitude_: the _Canaanites_ had their horses from _Egypt_;
and yet in the days of _Moses_ all the chariots of _Egypt_, with which
_Pharaoh_ pursued _Israel_ were but six hundred, _Exod._ xiv. 7. From the
great army of the _Philistims_ against _Saul_, and the great number of
their horses, I seem to gather that the Shepherds had newly relinquished
_Egypt_; and joyned them: the Shepherds might be beaten and driven out of
the greatest part of _Egypt_, and shut up in _Abaris_ by _Misphragmuthosis_
in the latter end of the days of _Eli_; and some of them fly to the
_Philistims_, and strengthen them against _Israel_, in the last year of
_Eli_; and from the _Philistims_ some of the Shepherds might go to _Zidon_,
and from _Zidon_, by sea to _Asia minor_ and _Greece_: and afterwards, in
the beginning of the Reign of _Saul_, the Shepherds who still remained in
_Egypt_ might be forced by _Tethmosis_ or _Amosis_ the son of
_Misphragmuthosis_, to leave _Abaris_, and retire in very great numbers to
the _Philistims_; and upon these occasions several of them, as _Pelasgus_,
_Inachus_, _Lelex_, _Cecrops_, and _Abas_, might come with their people by
sea from _Egypt_ to _Zidon_ and _Cyprus_, and thence to _Asia minor_ and
_Greece_, in the days of _Eli_, _Samuel_ and _Saul_, and thereby begin to
open a commerce by sea between _Zidon_ and _Greece_, before the revolt of
_Edom_ from _Judæa_, and the final coming of the _Phœnicians_ from the _Red
Sea_.

_Pelasgus_ Reigned in _Arcadia_, and was the father of _Lycaon_, according
to _Pherecydes Atheniensis_, and _Lycaon_ died just before the flood of
_Deucalion_; and therefore his father _Pelasgus_ might come into _Greece_
about two Generations before _Cadmus_, or in the latter end of the days of
_Eli_: _Lycaon_ sacrificed children, and therefore his father might come
with his people from the Shepherds in _Egypt_, and perhaps from the regions
of _Heliopolis_, where they sacrificed men, 'till _Amosis_ abolished that
custom. _Misphragmuthosis_ the father of _Amosis_, drove the Shepherds out
of a great part of _Egypt_, and shut the remainder up in _Abaris_: and then
great numbers might escape to _Greece_; some from the regions of
_Heliopolis_ under _Pelasgus_, and others from _Memphis_ and other places,
under other Captains: and hence it might come to pass that the _Pelasgians_
were at the first very numerous in _Greece_, and spake a different language
from the _Greek_, and were the ringleaders in bringing into _Greece_ the
worship of the dead.

_Inachus_ is called the son of _Oceanus_, perhaps because he came to
_Greece_ by sea: he might come with his people to _Argos_ from _Egypt_ in
the days of _Eli_, and seat himself upon the river _Inachus_, so named from
him, and leave his territories to his sons _Phoroneus_, _Ægialeus_, and
_Phegeus_, in the days of _Samuel_: for _Car_ the son of _Phoroneus_ built
a Temple to _Ceres_ in _Megara_, and therefore was contemporary to
_Erechtheus_. _Phoroneus_ Reigned at _Argos_, and _Aegialeus_ at _Sicyon_,
and founded those Kingdoms; and yet _Ægialeus_ is made above five hundred
years older than _Phoroneus_ by some Chronologers: but [195] _Acusilaus_,
[196] _Anticlides_ and [197] _Plato_, accounted _Phoroneus_ the oldest King
in _Greece_, and [198] _Apollodorus_ tells us, _Ægialeus_ was the brother
of _Phoroneus_. _Ægialeus_ died without issue, and after him Reigned
_Europs_, _Telchin_, _Apis_, _Lamedon_, _Sicyon_, _Polybus_, _Adrastus_,
and _Agamemnon_, _&c._ and _Sicyon_ gave his name to the Kingdom:
_Herodotus_ [199] saith that _Apis_ in the _Greek_ Tongue is _Epaphus_; and
_Hyginus_, [200] that _Epaphus_ the _Sicyonian_ got _Antiopa_ with child:
but the later _Greeks_ have made two men of the two names _Apis_ and
_Epaphus_ or _Epopeus_, and between them inserted twelve feigned Kings of
_Sicyon_, who made no wars, nor did any thing memorable, and yet Reigned
five hundred and twenty years, which is, one with another, above forty and
three years a-piece. If these feigned Kings be rejected, and the two Kings
_Apis_ and _Epopeus_ be reunited; _Ægialeus_ will become contemporary to
his brother _Phoroneus_, as he ought to be; for _Apis_ or _Epopeus_, and
_Nycteus_ the guardian of _Labdacus_, were slain in battle about the tenth
year of _Solomon_, as above; and the first four Kings of _Sicyon_,
_Ægialeus_, _Europs_, _Telchin_, _Apis_, after the rate of about twenty
years to a Reign, take up about eighty years; and these years counted
upwards from the tenth year of _Solomon_, place the beginning of the Reign
of _Ægialeus_ upon the twelfth year of _Samuel_, or thereabout: and about
that time began the Reign of _Phoroneus_ at _Argos_; _Apollodorus_ [201]
calls _Adrastus_ King of _Argos_; but _Homer_ [202] tells us, that he
Reigned first at _Sicyon_: he was in the first war against _Thebes_. Some
place _Janiscus_ and _Phæstus_ between _Polybus_ and _Adrastus_, but
without any certainty.

_Lelex_ might come with his people into _Laconia_ in the days of _Eli_, and
leave his territories to his sons _Myles_, _Eurotas_, _Cleson_, and
_Polycaon_ in the days of _Samuel_. _Myles_ set up a quern, or handmill to
grind corn, and is reputed the first among the _Greeks_ who did so: but he
flourished before _Triptolemus_, and seems to have had his corn and
artificers from _Egypt_. _Eurotas_ the brother, or as some say the son of
_Myles_, built _Sparta_, and called it after the name of his daughter
_Sparta_, the wife of _Lacedæmon_, and mother of _Eurydice_. _Cleson_ was
the father of _Pylas_ the father of _Sciron_, who married the daughter of
_Pandion_ the son of _Erechtheus_, and contended with _Nisus_ the son of
_Pandion_ and brother of _Ægeus_, for the Kingdom; and _Æacus_ adjudged it
to _Nisus_. _Polycaon_ invaded _Messene_, then peopled only by villages,
called it _Messene_ after the name of his wife, and built cities therein.

_Cecrops_ came from _Sais_ in _Egypt_ to _Cyprus_, and thence into
_Attica_: and he might do this in the days of _Samuel_, and marry _Agraule_
the daughter of _Actæus_, and succeed him in _Attica_ soon after, and leave
his Kingdom to _Cranaus_ in the Reign of _Saul_, or in the beginning of the
Reign of _David_: for the flood of _Deucalion_ happened in the Reign of
_Cranaus_.

Of about the same age with _Pelasgus_, _Inachus_, _Lelex_, and _Actæus_,
was _Ogyges_: he Reigned in _Bœotia_, and some of his people were
_Leleges_: and either he or his son _Eleusis_ built the city _Eleusis_ in
_Attica_, that is, they built a few houses of clay, which in time grew into
a city. _Acusilaus_ wrote that _Phoroneus_ was older than _Ogyges_, and
that _Ogyges_ flourished 1020 years before the first Olympiad, as above;
but _Acusilaus_ was an _Argive_, and feigned these things in honour of his
country: to call things _Ogygian_ has been a phrase among the ancient
_Greeks_, to signify that they are as old as the first memory of things;
and so high we have now carried up the Chronology of the _Greeks_.
_Inachus_ might be as old as _Ogyges_, but _Acusilaus_ and his followers
made them seven hundred years older than the truth; and Chronologers, to
make out this reckoning, have lengthened the races of the Kings of _Argos_
and _Sicyon_, and changed several contemporary Princes of _Argos_ into
successive Kings, and inserted many feigned Kings into the race of the
Kings of _Sicyon_.

_Inachus_ had several sons, who Reigned in several parts of _Peloponnesus_,
and there built Towns; as _Phoroneus_, who built _Phoronicum_, afterwards
called _Argos_, from _Argus_ his grandson; _Ægialeus_, who built _Ægialea_,
afterwards called _Sicyon_, from _Sicyon_ the grandson of _Erechtheus_;
_Phegeus_, who built _Phegea_, afterwards called _Psophis_, from _Psophis_
the daughter of _Lycaon_: and these were the oldest towns in _Peloponnesus_
then _Sisyphus_, the son of _Æolus_ and grandson of _Hellen_, built
_Ephyra_, afterwards called _Corinth_; and _Aëthlius_, the son of _Æolus_,
built _Elis_: and before them _Cecrops_ built _Cecropia_, the cittadel of
_Athens_; and _Lycaon_ built _Lycosura_, reckoned by some the oldest town
in _Arcadia_; and his sons, who were at least four and twenty in number,
built each of them a town; except the youngest, called _Oenotrus_, who grew
up after his father's death, and sailed into _Italy_ with his people, and
there set on foot the building of towns, and became the _Janus_ of the
_Latines_. _Phoroneus_ had also several children and grand-children, who
Reigned in several places, and built new towns, as _Car_, _Apis_, &c. and
_Hæmon_, the son of _Pelasgus_, Reigned in _Hæmonia_, afterwards called
_Thessaly_, and built towns there. This division and subdivision has made
great confusion in the history of the first Kingdoms of _Peloponnesus_, and
thereby given occasion to the vain-glorious _Greeks_, to make those
kingdoms much older than they really were: but by all the reckonings
abovementioned, the first civilizing of the _Greeks_, and teaching them to
dwell in houses and towns, and the oldest towns in _Europe_, could scarce
be above two or three Generations older than the coming of _Cadmus_ from
_Zidon_ into _Greece_; and might most probably be occasioned by the
expulsion of the Shepherds out of _Egypt_ in the days of _Eli_ and
_Samuel_, and their flying into _Greece_ in considerable numbers: but it's
difficult to set right the Genealogies and Chronology of the Fabulous Ages
of the _Greeks_, and I leave these things to be further examined.

Before the _Phœnicians_ introduced the Deifying of dead men, the _Greeks_
had a Council of Elders in every town for the government thereof, and a
place where the elders and people worshipped their God with Sacrifices: and
when many of those towns, for their common safety, united under a common
Council, they erected a _Prytaneum_ or Court in one of the towns, where the
Council and People met at certain times, to consult their common safety,
and worship their common God with sacrifices, and to buy and sell: the
towns where these Councils met, the _Greeks_ called δημοι, peoples or
communities, or Corporation Towns: and at length, when many of these δημοι
for their common safety united by consent under one common Council, they
erected a _Prytaneum_ in one of the δημοι for the common Council and People
to meet in, and to consult and worship in, and feast, and buy, and sell;
and this δημος they walled about for its safety, and called την πολιν the
city: and this I take to have been the original of Villages, Market-Towns,
Cities, common Councils, Vestal Temples, Feasts and Fairs, in _Europe_: the
_Prytaneum_, πυρος ταμειον, was a Court with a place of worship, and a
perpetual fire kept therein upon an Altar for sacrificing: from the word
‛Εστια fire, came the name _Vesta_, which at length the people turned into
a Goddess, and so became fire-worshippers like the ancient _Persians_: and
when these Councils made war upon their neighbours, they had a general
commander to lead their armies, and he became their King.

So _Thucydides_ [203] tells us, that _under_ Cecrops _and the ancient
Kings, untill _Theseus_; _Attica_ was always inhabited city by city, each
having Magistrates and _Prytanea_: neither did they consult the King, when
there was no fear of danger, but each apart administred their own
common-wealth, and had their own Council, and even sometimes made war, as
the _Eleusinians_ with _Eumolpus_ did against _Erechtheus_: but when
_Theseus_, a prudent and potent man obtained the Kingdom, he took away the
Courts and Magistrates of the other cities, and made them all meet in one
Council and _Prytaneum_ at _Athens__. _Polemon_, as he is cited by [204]
_Strabo_, tells us, _that in this body of _Attica_, there were 170 _δημοι_,
one of which was _Eleusis__: and _Philochorus_ [205] relates, that _when
_Attica_ was infested by sea and land by the _Cares_ and _Bœoti_, _Cecrops_
the first of any man reduced the multitude, _that is the 170 towns_, into
twelve cities, whose names were _Cecropia_, _Tetrapolis_, _Epacria_,
_Decelia_, _Eleusis_, _Aphydna_, _Thoricus_, _Brauron_, _Cytherus_,
_Sphettus_, _Cephissia_, and _Phalerus_; and that _Theseus_ contracted
those twelve cities into one, which was _Athens__.

The original of the Kingdom of the _Argives_ was much after the same
manner: for _Pausanias_ [206] tells us, _that _Phoroneus_ the son of
_Inachus_ was the first who gathered into one community the _Argives_, who
'till then were scattered, and lived every where apart, and the place where
they were first assembled was called _Phoronicum_, the city of
_Phoroneus__: and _Strabo_ [207] observes, _that _Homer_ calls all the
places which he reckons up in _Peloponnesus_, a few excepted, not cities
but regions, because each of them consisted of a convention of many_ δημοι,
_free towns, out of which afterward noble cities were built and frequented:
so the _Argives_ composed _Mantinæa_ in _Arcadia_ out of five towns, and
_Tegea_ out of nine; and out of so many was _Heræa_ built by _Cleombrotus_,
or by _Cleonymus_: so also _Ægium_ was built out of seven or eight towns,
_Patræ_: out of seven, and _Dyme_ out of eight; and so _Elis_ was erected
by the conflux of many towns into one city._

_Pausanias_ [208] tells us, that the _Arcadians_ accounted _Pelasgus_ the
first man, and that he was their first King; and _taught the ignorant
people to built houses, for defending themselves from heat, and cold, and
rain; and to make them garments of skins; and instead of herbs and roots,
which were sometimes noxious, to eat the acorns of the beech tree_; and
that his son _Lycaon_ built the oldest city in all _Greece_: he tells us
also, that in the days of _Lelex_ the _Spartans_ lived in villages apart.
The _Greeks_ therefore began to build houses and villages in the days of
_Pelasgus_ the father of _Lycaon_, and in the days of _Lelex_ the father of
_Myles_, and by consequence about two or three Generations before the Flood
of _Deucalion_, and the coming of _Cadmus_; 'till then [209] they lived in
woods and caves of the earth. The first houses were of clay, 'till the
brothers _Euryalus_ and _Hyperbius_ taught them to harden the clay into
bricks, and to build therewith. In the days of _Ogyges_, _Pelasgus_,
_Æzeus_, _Inachus_ and _Lelex_, they began to build houses and villages of
clay, _Doxius_ the son of _Cœlus_ teaching them to do it; and in the days
of _Lycaon_, _Phoroneus_, _Ægialeus_, _Phegeus_, _Eurotas_, _Myles_,
_Polycaon_, and _Cecrops_, and their sons, to assemble the villages into
δημοι, and the δημοι into cities.

When _Oenotrus_ the son of _Lycaon_ carried a Colony into _Italy_, _he_
[210] _found that country for the most part uninhabited; and where it was
inhabited, peopled but thinly: and seizing a part of it, he built towns in
the mountains, little and numerous_, as above: these towns were without
walls; but after this Colony grew numerous, and began to want room, _they
expelled the _Siculi_, compassed many cities with walls, and became possest
of all the territory between the two rivers _Liris_ and _Tibre__: and it is
to be understood that those cities had their Councils and _Prytanea_ after
the manner of the _Greeks_: for _Dionysius_ [211] tells us, that the new
Kingdom of _Rome_, as _Romulus_ left it, consisted of thirty Courts or
Councils, in thirty towns, each with the sacred fire kept in the
_Prytaneum_ of the Court, for the Senators who met there to perform Sacred
Rites, after the manner of the _Greeks_: _but when _Numa_ the successor of
_Romulus_ Reigned, he leaving the several fires in their own Courts,
instituted one common to them all at _Rome__: whence _Rome_ was not a
compleat city before the days of _Numa_.

When navigation was so far improved that the _Phœnicians_ began to leave
the sea-shore, and sail through the _Mediterranean_ by the help of the
stars, it may be presumed that they began to discover the islands of the
_Mediterranean_, and for the sake of trafic to sail as far as _Greece_: and
this was not long before they carried away _Io_ the daughter of _Inachus_,
from _Argos_. The _Cares_ first infested the _Greek_ seas with piracy, and
then _Minos_ the son of _Europa_ got up a potent fleet, and sent out
Colonies: for _Diodorus_ [212] tells us, that the _Cyclades_ islands, those
near _Crete_, were at first desolate and uninhabited; but _Minos_ having a
potent fleet, sent many Colonies out of _Crete_, and peopled many of them;
and particularly that the island _Carpathus_ was first seized by the
soldiers of _Minos_: _Syme_ lay waste and desolate 'till _Triops_ came
thither with a Colony under _Chthonius_: _Strongyle_ or _Naxus_ was first
inhabited by the _Thracians_ in the days of _Boreas_, a little before the
_Argonautic_ Expedition: _Samsos_ was, at first desert, and inhabited only
by a great multitude of terrible wild beasts, 'till _Macareus_ peopled it,
as he did also the islands _Chius_ and _Cos_. _Lesbos_ lay waste and
desolate 'till _Xanthus_ sailed thither with a Colony: _Tenedos_ lay
desolate 'till _Tennes_, a little before the _Trojan_ war, sailed thither
from _Troas_. _Aristæus_, who married _Autonoe_ the daughter of _Cadmus_,
carried a Colony from _Thebes_ into _Cæa_, an island not inhabited before:
the island _Rhodes_ was at first called _Ophiusa_, being full of serpents,
before _Phorbas_, a Prince of _Argos_, went thither, and made it habitable
by destroying the serpents, which was about the end of _Solomon_'s Reign;
in memory of which he is delineated in the heavens in the Constellation of
_Ophiuchus_. The discovery of this and some other islands made a report
that they rose out of the Sea: _in Asia Delos emersit, & Hiera, & Anaphe, &
Rhodus_, saith [213] _Ammianus_: and [214] _Pliny_; _claræ jampridem
insulæ, Delos & Rhodos memoriæ produntur enatæ, postea minores, ultra Melon
Anaphe, inter Lemnum & Hellespontum Nea, inter Lebedum & Teon Halone_, &c.

_Diodorus_ [215] tells us also, that the seven islands called _Æolides_,
between _Italy_ and _Sicily_, were desert and uninhabited 'till _Lipparus_
and _Æolus_, a little before the _Trojan_ war, went thither from _Italy_,
and peopled them: and that _Malta_ and _Gaulus_ or _Gaudus_ on the other
side of _Sicily_, were first peopled by _Phœnicians_; and so was _Madera_
without the _Straits_: and _Homer_ writes that _Ulysses_ found the Island
_Ogygia_ covered with wood, and uninhabited, except by _Calypso_ and her
maids, who lived in a cave without houses; and it is not likely that _Great
Britain_ and _Ireland_ could be peopled before navigation was propagated
beyond the _Straits_.

The _Sicaneans_ were reputed the first inhabitants of _Sicily_, they built
little Villages or Towns upon hills, and every Town had its own King; and
by this means they spread over the country, before they formed themselves
into larger governments with a common King: _Philistus_ [216] saith that
_they were transplanted into _Sicily_ from the River _Sicanus_ in _Spain__;
and _Dionysius_ [217], that _they were a _Spanish_ people who fled from the
_Ligures_ in _Italy__; he means the _Ligures_ [218] who opposed _Hercules_
when he returned from his expedition against _Geryon_ in _Spain_, and
endeavoured to pass the _Alps_ out of _Gaul_ into _Italy_. _Hercules_ that
year got into _Italy_, and made some conquests there, and founded the city
_Croton_; and [219] after winter, upon the arrival of his fleet from
_Erythra_ in _Spain_, sailed to _Sicily_, and there left the _Sicani_: for
_it was his custom to recruit his army with conquered people, and after
they had assisted him in making new conquests to reward them with new
seats_: this was the _Egyptian Hercules_, who had a potent fleet, and in
the days of _Solomon_ sailed to the _Straits_, and according to his custom
set up pillars there, and conquered _Geryon_, and returned back by _Italy_
and _Sicily_ to _Egypt_, and was by the ancient _Gauls_ called _Ogmius_,
and by _Egyptians_ [220] _Nilus_: for _Erythra_ and the country of _Geryon_
were without the _Straits_. _Dionysius_ [221] represents this _Hercules_
contemporary to _Evander_.

The first inhabitants of _Crete_, according to _Diodorus_ [222] were called
_Eteocretans_; but whence they were, and how they came thither, is not said
in history: then sailed thither a Colony of _Pelasgians_ from _Greece_; and
soon after _Teutamus_, the grandfather of _Minos_, carried thither a Colony
of _Dorians_ from _Laconia_, and from the territory of _Olympia_ in
_Peloponnesus_: and these several Colonies spake several languages, and fed
on the spontaeous fruits of the earth, and lived quietly in caves and huts,
'till the invention of iron tools, in the days of _Asterius_ the son of
_Teutamus_; and at length were reduced into one Kingdom, and one People, by
_Minos_, who was their first law-giver, and built many towns and ships, and
introduced plowing and sowing, and in whose days the _Curetes_ conquered
his father's friends in _Crete_ and _Peloponnesus_. The _Curetes_ [223]
sacrificed children to _Saturn_ and according to _Bochart_ [224] were
_Philistims_; and _Eusebius_ faith that _Crete_ had its name from _Cres_,
one of the _Curetes_ who nursed up _Jupiter_: but whatever was the original
of the island, it seems to have been peopled by Colonies which spake
different languages, 'till the days of _Asterius_ and _Minos_; and might
come thither two or three Generations before, and not above, for want of
navigation in those seas.

The island _Cyprus_ was discovered by the _Phœnicians_ not long before; for
_Eratosthenes_ [225] tells us, _that _Cyprus_ was at first so overgrown
with wood that it could not be tilled, and that they first cut down the
wood for the melting of copper and silver, and afterwards when they began
to sail safely upon the _Mediterranean__, that is, presently after the
_Trojan_ war, _they built ships and even navies of it: and when they could
not thus destroy the wood, they gave every man leave to cut down what wood
he pleased, and to possess all the ground which he cleared of wood_. So
also _Europe_ at first abounded very much with woods, one of which, called
the _Hercinian_, took up a great part of _Germany_, being full nine days
journey broad, and above forty long, in _Julius Cæsar_'s days: and yet the
_Europeans_ had been cutting down their woods, to make room for mankind,
ever since the invention of iron tools, in the days of _Asterius_ and
_Minos_.

All these footsteps there are of the first peopling of _Europe_, and its
Islands, by sea; before those days it seems to have been thinly peopled
from the northern coast of the _Euxine-sea_ by _Scythians_ descended from
_Japhet_, who wandered without houses, and sheltered themselves from rain
and wild beasts in thickets and caves of the earth; such as were the caves
in mount _Ida_ in _Crete_, in which _Minos_ was educated and buried; the
cave of _Cacus_, and the _Catacombs_ in _Italy_ near _Rome_ and _Naples_,
afterwards turned into burying-places; the _Syringes_ and many other caves
in the sides of the mountains of _Egypt_; the caves of the _Troglodites_
between _Egypt_ and the _Red Sea_, and those of the _Phaurusii_ in _Afric_,
mentioned by [226] _Strabo_; and the caves, and thickets, and rocks, and
high places, and pits, in which the _Israelites_ hid themselves from the
_Philistims_ in the days of _Saul_, 1 _Sam._ xiii. 6. But of the state of
mankind in _Europe_ in those days there is now no history remaining.

The antiquities of _Libya_ were not much older than those of _Europe_; for
_Diodorus_ [227] tells us, that _Uranus_ the father of _Hyperion_, and
grandfather of _Helius_ and _Selene_, that is _Ammon_ the father of
_Sesac_, _was their first common King, and caused the people, who 'till
then wandered up and down, to dwell in towns_: and _Herodotus_ [228] tells
us, that all _Media_ was peopled by δημοι, towns without walls, 'till they
revolted from the _Assyrians_, which was about 267 years after the death of
_Solomon_: and that after that revolt they set up a King over them, and
built _Ecbatane_ with walls for his seat, the first town which they walled
about; and about 72 years after the death of _Solomon_, _Benhadad_ King of
_Syria_ [229] had two and thirty Kings in his army against _Ahab_: and when
_Joshuah_ conquered the land of _Canaan_, every city of the _Canaanites_
had its own King, like the cities of _Europe_, before they conquered one
another; and one of those Kings, _Adonibezek_, the King of _Bezek_ had
conquered seventy other Kings a little before, _Judg._ i. 7. and therefore
towns began to be built in that land not many ages before the days of
_Joshuah_: for the Patriarchs wandred there in tents, and fed their flocks
where-ever they pleased, the fields of _Phœnicia_ not being yet fully
appropriated, for want of people. The countries first inhabited by mankind,
were in those days so thinly peopled, that [230] four Kings from the coasts
of _Shinar_ and _Elam_ invaded and spoiled the _Rephaims_, and the
inhabitants of the countries of _Moab_, _Ammon_, _Edom_, and the Kingdoms
of _Sodom_, _Gomorrah_, _Admah_ and _Zeboim_; and yet were pursued and
beaten by _Abraham_ with an armed force of only 318 men, the whole force
which _Abraham_ and the princes with him could raise: and _Egypt_ was so
thinly peopled before the birth of _Moses_, that _Pharaoh_ said of the
_Israelites_; [231] _behold the people of the children of _Israel_ are more
and mightier than we_: and to prevent their multiplying and growing too
strong, he caused their male children to be drowned.

These footsteps there are of the first peopling of the earth by mankind,
not long before the days of _Abraham_; and of the overspreading it with
villages, towns and cities, and their growing into Kingdoms, first Smaller
and then greater, until the rise of the Monarchies of _Egypt_, _Assyria_,
_Babylon_, _Media_, _Persia_, _Greece_, and _Rome_, the first great Empires
on this side _India_. _Abraham_ was the fifth from _Peleg_, and all mankind
lived together in _Chaldea_ under the Government of _Noah_ and his sons,
untill the days of _Peleg_: so long they were of one language, one society,
and one religion: and then they divided the earth, being perhaps, disturbed
by the rebellion of _Nimrod_, and forced to leave off building the tower of
_Babel_: and from thence they spread themselves into the several countries
which fell to their shares, carrying along with them the laws, customs and
religion, under which they had 'till those days been educated and governed,
by _Noah_, and his sons and grandsons: and these laws were handed down to
_Abraham_, _Melchizedek_, and _Job_, and their contemporaries, and for some
time were observed by the judges of the eastern countries: so _Job_ [232]
tells us, that adultery was _an heinous crime, yea an iniquity to be
punished by the judges_: and of idolatry he [233] saith, _If I beheld the
sun when it shined, or the moon walking in brightness, and my heart hath
been secretly inticed, or my mouth hath kissed my hand, this also were an
iniquity to be punished by the judge: for I should have denied the God that
is above_: and there being no dispute between _Job_ and his friends about
these matters, it may be presumed that they also with their countrymen were
of the same religion. _Melchizedek_ was a Priest of the most high God, and
_Abraham_ voluntarily paid tythes to him; which he would scarce have done
had they not been of one and the same religion. The first inhabitants of
the land of _Canaan_ seem also to have been originally of the same
religion, and to have continued in it 'till the death of _Noah_, and the
days of _Abraham_; for _Jerusalem_ was anciently [234] called _Jebus_, and
its people _Jebusites_, and _Melchizedek_ was their Priest and King: these
nations revolted therefore after the days of _Melchizedek_ to the worship
of false Gods; as did also the posterity of _Ismael_, _Esau_, _Moab_,
_Ammon_, and that of _Abraham_ by _Keturah_: and the _Israelites_
themselves were very apt to revolt: and one reason why _Terah_ went from
_Ur_ of the _Chaldees_ to _Haran_ in his way to the land of _Canaan_; and
why _Abraham_ afterward left _Haran_, and went into the land of _Canaan_,
might be to avoid the worship of false Gods, which in their days began in
_Chaldea_, and spread every way from thence; but did not yet reach into the
land of _Canaan_. Several of the laws and precepts in which this primitive
religion consisted are mentioned in the book of _Job_, chap. i. ver. 5, and
chap, xxxi, _viz._ _not to blaspheme God, nor to worship the Sun or Moon,
nor to kill, nor steal, nor to commit adultery, nor trust in riches, nor
oppress the poor or fatherless, nor curse your enemies, nor rejoyce at
their misfortunes: but to be friendly, and hospitable and merciful, and to
relieve the poor and needy, and to set up Judges_. This was the morality
and religion of the first ages, still called by the _Jews_, _The precepts
of the sons of _Noah__: this was the religion of _Moses_ and the Prophets,
comprehended in the two great commandments, of _loving the Lord our God
with all our heart and soul and mind, and our neighbour as our selves_:
this was the religion enjoyned by _Moses_ to the uncircumcised stranger
within the gates of _Israel_, as well as to the _Israelites_: and this is
the primitive religion of both _Jews_ and _Christians_, and ought to be the
standing religion of all nations, it being for the honour of God, and good
of mankind: and _Moses_ adds the precept of _being merciful even to brute
beasts, so as not to suck out their blood, nor to cut off their flesh alive
with the blood in it, nor to kill them for the sake of their blood, nor to
strangle them; but in killing them for food, to let out their blood and
spill it upon the ground_, _Gen._ ix. 4, and _Levit_. xvii. 12, 13. This
law was ancienter than the days of _Moses_, being given to _Noah_ and his
sons long before the days of _Abraham_: and therefore when the Apostles and
Elders in the Council at _Jerusalem_ declared that the Gentiles were not
obliged to be circumcised and keep the law of _Moses_, they excepted this
law of _abstaining from blood, and things strangled_ as being an earlier
law of God, imposed not on the sons of _Abraham_ only, but on all nations,
while they lived together in _Shinar_ under the dominion of _Noah_: and of
the same kind is the law of _abstaining from meats offered to Idols or
false Gods, and from fornication_. So then, _the believing that the world
was framed by one supreme God, and is governed by him; and the loving and
worshipping him, and honouring our parents, and loving our neighbour as our
selves, and being merciful even to brute beasts_, is the oldest of all
religions: and the Original of letters, agriculture, navigation, music,
arts and sciences, metals, smiths and carpenters, towns and houses, was not
older in _Europe_ than the days of _Eli_, _Samuel_ and _David_; and before
those days the earth was so thinly peopled, and so overgrown with woods,
that mankind could not be much older than is represented in Scripture.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. II

_Of the Empire of _Egypt_._

The _Egyptians_ anciently boasted of a very great and lasting Empire under
their Kings _Ammon_, _Osiris_, _Bacchus_, _Sesostris_, _Hercules_,
_Memnon_, &c. reaching eastward to the _Indies_, and westward to the
_Atlantic Ocean_; and out of vanity have made this monarchy some thousands
of years older than the world: let us now try to rectify the Chronology of
_Egypt_; by comparing the affairs of _Egypt_ with the synchronizing affairs
of the _Greeks_ and _Hebrews_.

_Bacchus_ the conqueror loved two women, _Venus_ and _Ariadne_: _Venus_ was
the mistress of _Anchises_ and _Cinyras_, and mother of _Æneas_, who all
lived 'till the destruction of _Troy_; and the sons of _Bacchus_ and
_Ariadne_ were _Argonauts_; as above: and therefore the great _Bacchus_
flourished but one Generation before the _Argonautic_ expedition. This
_Bacchus_ [235] was potent at sea, conquered eastward as far as _India_
returned in triumph, brought his army over the _Hellespont_; conquered
_Thrace_, left music, dancing and poetry there; killed _Lycurgus_ King of
_Thrace_, and _Pentheus_ the grandson of _Cadmus_; gave the Kingdom of
_Lycurgus_ to _Tharops_; and one of his minstrells, called by the _Greeks_
_Calliope_, to _Oeagrus_ the son of _Tharops_; and of _Oeagrus_ and
_Calliope_ was born _Orpheus_, who sailed with the _Argonauts_: this
_Bacchus_ was therefore contemporary to _Sesostris_; and both being Kings
of _Egypt_, and potent at sea, and great conquerors, and carrying on their
conquests into _India_ and _Thrace_, they must be one and the same man.

The antient _Greeks_, who made the fables of the Gods, related that _Io_
the daughter of _Inachus_ was carried into _Egypt_; and there became the
_Egyptian Isis_; and that _Apis_ the son of _Phoroneus_ after death became
the God _Serapis_; and some said that _Epaphus_ was the son of _Io_:
_Serapis_ and _Epaphus_ are _Osiris_, and therefore _Isis_ and _Osiris_, in
the opinion of the ancient _Greeks_ who made the fables of the Gods, were
not above two or three Generations older than the _Argonautic_ expedition.
_Dicæarchus_, as he is cited by the scholiast upon _Apollonius_, [236]
represents them two Generations older than _Sesostris_, saying that after
_Orus_ the son of _Osiris_ and _Isis_, Reigned _Sesonchosis_. He seems to
have followed the opinion of the people of _Naxus_, who made _Bacchus_ two
Generations older than _Theseus_, and for that end feigned two _Minos's_
and two _Ariadnes_; for by the consent of all antiquity _Osiris_ and
_Bacchus_ were one and the same King of _Egypt_: this is affirmed by the
_Egyptians_, as well as by the _Greeks_; and some of the antient
Mythologists, as _Eumolpus_ and _Orpheus_, [237] called _Osiris_ by the
names of _Dionysus_ and _Sirius_. _Osiris_ was King of all _Egypt_, and a
great conqueror, and came over the _Hellespont_ in the days of
_Triptolemus_, and subdued _Thrace_, and there killed _Lycurgus_; and
therefore his expedition falls in with that of the great _Bacchus_.
_Osiris_, _Bacchus_ and _Sesostris_ lived about the same time, and by the
relation of historians were all of them Kings of all _Egypt_, and Reigned
at _Thebes_, and adorned that city, and were very potent by land and sea:
all three were great conquerors, and carried on their conquests by land
through _Asia_ as far as _India_: all three came over the _Hellespont_ and
were there in danger of losing their army: all three conquered _Thrace_,
and there put a stop to their victories, and returned back from thence into
_Egypt_: all three left pillars with inscriptions in their conquests: and
therefore all three must be one and the same King of _Egypt_; and this King
can be no other than _Sesac_. All _Egypt_, including _Thebais_, _Ethiopia_
and _Libya_, had no common King before the expulsion of the Shepherds who
Reigned in the lower _Egypt_; no Conqueror of _Syria_, _India_, _Asia
minor_ and _Thrace_, before _Sesac_; and the sacred history admits of no
_Egyptian_ conqueror of _Palestine_ before this King.

_Thymætes_ [238] who was contemporary to _Orpheus_, and wrote a poesy
called _Phrygia_, of the actions of _Bacchus_ in very old language and
character, said that _Bacchus_ had _Libyan_ women in his army, amongst whom
was _Minerva_ a woman born in _Libya_, near the river _Triton,_ and that
_Bacchus_ commanded the men and _Minerva_ the women. _Diodorus_ [239] calls
her _Myrina_, and saith that she was Queen of the _Amazons_ in _Libya_, and
there conquered the _Atlantides_ and _Gorgons_, and then made a league with
_Orus_ the son of _Isis_, sent to her by his father _Osiris_ or _Bacchus_
for that purpose, and passing through _Egypt_ subdued the _Arabians_, and
_Syria_ and _Cilicia_, and came through _Phrygia_, _viz._ in the army of
_Bacchus_ to the _Mediterranean_; but palling over into _Europe_, was slain
with many of her women by the _Thracians_ and _Scythians_, under the
conduct of _Sipylus_ a _Scythian_, and _Mopsus_ a _Thracian_ whom
_Lycurgus_ King of _Thrace_ had banished. This was that _Lycurgus_ who
opposed the passage of _Bacchus_ over the _Hellespont_, and was soon after
conquered by him, and slain: but afterwards _Bacchus_ met with a repulse
from the _Greeks_, under the conduct of _Perseus_, who slew many of his
women, as _Pausanias_ [240] relates, and was assisted by the _Scythians_
and _Thracians_ under the conduct of _Sipylus_ and _Mopsus_; which
repulses, together with a revolt of his brother _Danaus_ in _Egypt_; put a
stop to his victories: and in returning home he left part of his men in
_Colchis_ and at _Mount Caucasus_, under _Æetes_ and _Prometheus_; and his
women upon the river _Thermodon_ near _Colchis_, under their new Queens
_Marthesia_ and _Lampeto_: for _Diodorus_ [241] speaking of the _Amazons_
who were seated at _Thermodon_, saith, that they dwelt originally in
_Libya_, and there Reigned over the _Atlantides_, and invading their
neighbours conquered as far as _Europe_: and _Ammianus_, [242] that the
ancient _Amazons_ breaking through many nations, attack'd the _Athenians_,
and there receiving a great slaughter retired to _Thermodon_: and _Justin_,
[243] that these _Amazons_ had at first, he means at their first coming to
_Thermodon_, two Queens who called themselves daughters of _Mars_; and that
they conquered part of _Europe_, and some cities of _Asia_, _viz._ in the
Reign of _Minerva_, and then sent back part of their army with a great
booty, under their said new Queens; and that _Marthesia_ being afterwards
slain, was succeeded by her daughter _Orithya_, and she by _Penthesilea_;
and that _Theseus_ captivated and married _Antiope_ the sister of
_Orithya_. _Hercules_ made war upon the _Amazons_, and in the Reign of
_Orithya_ and _Penthesilea_ they came to the _Trojan_ war: whence the first
wars of the _Amazons_ in _Europe_ and _Asia_, and their settling at
_Thermodon_, were but one Generation before those actions of _Hercules_ and
_Theseus_, and but two before the _Trojan_ war, and so fell in with the
expedition of _Sesostris_: and since they warred in the days of _Isis_ and
her son _Orus_, and were a part of the army of _Bacchus_ or _Osiris_, we
have here a further argument for making _Osiris_ and _Bacchus_ contemporary
to _Sesostris_, and all three one and the same King with _Sesac_.

The _Greeks_ reckon _Osiris_ and _Bacchus_ to be sons of _Jupiter_, and the
_Egyptian_ name of _Jupiter_ is _Ammon_. _Manetho_ in his 11th and 12th
_Dynasties_, as he is cited by _Africanus_ and _Eusebius_ names these four
Kings of _Egypt_, as reigning in order; _Ammenemes_, _Gesongeses_ or
_Sesonchoris_ the son of _Ammenemes_, _Ammenemes_ who was slain by his
Eunuchs, and _Sesostris_ who subdued all _Asia_ and part of _Europe_.
_Gesongeses_ and _Sesonchoris_ are corruptly written for _Sesonchosis_; and
the two first of these four Kings, _Ammenemes_ and _Sesonchosis_, are the
same with the two last, _Ammenemes_ and _Sesostris_, that is, with _Ammon_
and _Sesac_; for _Diodorus_ saith [244] that _Osiris_ built in _Thebes_ a
magnificent temple to his parents _Jupiter_ and _Juno_, and two other
temples to _Jupiter_, a larger to _Jupiter Uranius_, and a less to his
father _Jupiter Ammon_ who reigned in that city: and [245] _Thymætes_
abovementioned, who was contemporary to _Orpheus_, wrote expresly that the
father of _Bacchus_ was _Ammon_, a King Reigning over part of _Libya_, that
is, a King of _Egypt_ Reigning over all that part of _Libya_, anciently
called _Ammonia_. _Stephanus_ [246] saith Πασα ‛η Λιβυη ‛ουτως εκαλειτο απο
Αμμωνος· _All _Libya_ was anciently called _Ammonia_ from _Ammon__: this is
that King of _Egypt_ from whom _Thebes_ was called _No-Ammon_, and
_Ammon-no_ the city of _Ammon_, and by the _Greeks Diospolis_, the city of
_Jupiter Ammon_: _Sesostris_ built it sumptuously, and called it by his
father's name, and from the same King the [247] River called _Ammon_, the
people called _Ammonii_, and the [248] promontory _Ammonium_ in _Arabia
fælix_ had their names.

The lower part of _Egypt_ being yearly overflowed by the _Nile_, was scarce
inhabited before the invention of corn, which made it useful: and the King,
who by this invention first peopled it and Reigned over it, perhaps the
King of the city _Mesir_ where _Memphis_ was afterwards built, seems to
have been worshipped by his subjects after death, in the ox or calf, for
this benefaction: for this city stood in the most convenient place to
people the lower _Egypt_, and from its being composed of two parts seated
on each side of the river _Nile_, might give the name of _Mizraim_ to its
founder and people; unless you had rather refer the word to the double
people, those above the _Delta_, and those within it: and this I take to be
the state of the lower _Egypt_, 'till the Shepherds or _Phœnicians_ who
fled from _Joshuah_ conquered it, and being afterwards conquered by the
_Ethiopians_, fled into _Afric_ and other places: for there was a tradition
that some of them fled into _Afric_; and St. _Austin_ [249] confirms this,
by telling us that the common people of _Afric_ being asked who they were,
replied _Chanani_, that is, _Canaanites_. _Interrogati rustici nostri_,
saith he, _quid sint, Punice respondentes Chanani, corrupta scilicet voce
sicut in talibus solet, quid aliud respondent quam Chanaanæi?_ _Procopius_
also [250] tells us of two pillars in the west of _Afric_, with
inscriptions signifying that the people were _Canaanites_ who fled from
_Joshuah_: and _Eusebius_ [251] tells us, that these _Canaanites_ flying
from the sons of _Israel_, built _Tripolis_ in _Afric_; and the _Jerusalem
Gemara_, [252] that the _Gergesites_ fled from _Joshua_, going into
_Afric_: and _Procopius_ relates their flight in this manner. Επει δε ‛ημας
‛ο της ‛ιστοριας λογος ενταυθ' ηγαγεν. επαναγκες ειπειν ανωθεν, ‛οθεν τε τα
Μαυρουσιων εθνη ες Λιβυην ηλθε, και ‛οπως ωικησαντο. Επειδη ‛Εβραιοι εξ
Αιγυπτου ανεχωρησαν, και αγχι των Παλαιστινης ‛οριων εγενοντο· Μωσης μεν
σοφος ανηρ, ‛ος αυτος της ‛οδου ‛ηγησατο, θνησκει. διαδεχεται δε την
‛ηγεμονιαν Ιησους ‛ο του Ναυη παις· ‛ος ες τε την Παλαιστινην τον λεων
τουτον εισηγαγε· και αρετην εν τωι πολεμωι κρεισσω ‛η κατα ανθρωπου φυσιν
επιδειξαμενος, την χωραν εσχε· και τα εθνη ‛απαντα καταστρεψαμενος, τας
πολεις ευπετως παρεστησατο, ανικητος τε πανταπασιν εδοξεν ειναι. τοτε δε ‛η
επιθαλασσια χωρα, εκ Σιδωνος μεχρι των Αιγυπτου ‛οριων, Φοινικη ξυμπασα
ωνομαζετο. βασιλευς δε εις το παλαιον εφεστηκει· ‛ωσπερ ‛απασιν
‛ωμολογηται, ‛οι Φοινικων τα αρχαιοτατα ανεγραψαντο. ενταυθ' ωκηντο εθνη
πολυανθρωποτατα, Γεργεσαιοι τε και Ιεβουσαιοι, και αλλα αττα ονοματα
εχοντα, ‛οις δη αυτα ‛η των ‛Εβραιων ‛ιστορια καλει. ‛ουτος ‛ο λαος επει
αμαχον τι χρημα τον επηλυτην στρατηγον ειδον· εξ ηθων των πατριων
εξανασταντες, επ' Αιγυπτον ‛ομορου ουσης εχωρησαν. ενθα χωρον ουδενα σφισιν
‛ικανον ενοικησασθαι ‛ευροντες, επει εν Αιγυπτω πολυανθρωπια εκ παλαιου ην·
ες Λιβυην μεχρι στηλων των ‛Ηρακλεους εσχον· ενταυθα τε και ες εμε τηι
Φοινικων φωνηι χρωμενοι ωικηνται. _Quando ad Mauros nos historia deduxit,
congruens nos exponere unde orta gens in Africa sedes fixerit. Quo tempore
egressi Ægypto Hebræi jam prope Palestinæ fines venerant, mortuus ibi
Moses, vir sapiens, dux itineris. Successor imperii factus Jesus Navæ
filius intra Palæstinam duxit popularium agmen; & virtute usus supra
humanum modum, terram occupavit, gentibusque excisis urbes ditionis suæ
fecit, & invicti famam tulit. Maritima ora quæ a Sidone ad Ægypti limitem
extenditur, nomen habet Phœnices. Rex unus _[Hebræis]_ imperabat ut omnes
qui res Phœnicias scripsere consentiunt. In eo tractatu numerosæ gentes
erant, Gergesæi, Jebusæi, quosque aliis nominibus Hebræorum annales
memorant. Hi homines ut impares se venienti imperatori videre, derelicto
patriæ solo ad finitimam primum venere Ægyptum, sed ibi capacem tantæ
multitudinis locum non reperientes, erat enim Ægyptus ab antiquo fœcunda
populis, in Africam profecti, multis conditis urbibus, omnem eam Herculis
columnas usque, obtinuerunt: ubi ad meam ætatem sermone Phœnicio utentes
habitant_. By the language and extreme poverty of the _Moors_, described
also by _Procopius_ and by their being unacquainted with merchandise and
sea-affairs, you may know that they were _Canaanites_ originally, and
peopled _Afric_ before the _Tyrian_ merchants came thither. These
_Canaanites_ coming from the East, pitched their tents in great numbers in
the lower _Egypt_, in the Reign of _Timaus_, as [253] _Manetho_ writes, and
easily seized the country, and fortifying _Pelusium_, then called _Abaris_,
they erected a Kingdom there, and Reigned long under their own Kings,
_Salatis_, _Bœon_, _Apachnas_, _Apophis_, _Janias_, _Assis_, and others
successively: and in the mean time the upper part of _Egypt_ called
_Thebais_, and according to [254] _Herodotus_, _Ægyptus_, and in Scripture
the land of _Pathros_, was under other Kings, Reigning perhaps at _Coptos_,
and _Thebes_, and _This_, and _Syene_, and [255] _Pathros_, and
_Elephantis_, and _Heracleopolis_, and _Mesir_, and other great cities,
'till they conquered one another, or were conquered by the _Ethiopians_:
for cities grew great in those days, by being the seats of Kingdoms: but at
length one of these Kingdoms conquered the rest, and made a lasting war
upon the Shepherds, and in the Reign of its King _Misphragmuthosis_, and
his son _Amosis_, called also _Tethmosis_, _Tuthmosis_, and _Thomosis_,
drove them out of _Egypt_, and made them fly into _Afric_ and _Syria_, and
other places, and united all _Egypt_ into one Monarchy; and under their
next Kings, _Ammon_ and _Sesac_, enlarged it into a great Empire. This
conquering people worshipped not the Kings of the Shepherds whom they
conquered and expelled, but [256] abolished their religion of sacrificing
men, and after the manner of those ages Deified their own Kings, who
founded their new Dominion, beginning the history of their Empire with the
Reign and great acts of their Gods and Heroes: whence their Gods _Ammon_
and _Rhea_, or _Uranus_ and _Titæa_; _Osiris_ and _Isis_; _Orus_ and
_Bubaste_: and their Secretary _Thoth_, and Generals _Hercules_ and _Pan_;
and Admiral _Japetus_, _Neptune_, or _Typhon_; were all of them _Thebans_,
and flourished after the expulsion of the Shepherds. _Homer_ places
_Thebes_ in _Ethiopia_, and the _Ethiopians_ reported that [257] the
_Egyptians_ were a colony drawn out of them by _Osiris_, and that thence it
came to pass that most of the laws of _Egypt_ were the same with those of
_Ethiopia_, and that the _Egyptians_ learnt from the _Ethiopians_ the
custom of Deifying their Kings.

When _Joseph_ entertained his brethren in _Egypt_, they did eat at a table
by themselves, and he did eat at another table by himself; and the
_Egyptians_ who did eat with him were at another table,  _because the
_Egyptians_ might not eat bread with the _Hebrews_; for that was an
abomination to the _Egyptians__, _Gen._ xliii. 32. These _Egyptians_ who
did eat with _Joseph_ were of the Court of _Pharaoh_; and therefore
_Pharaoh_ and his Court were at this time not Shepherds but genuine
_Egyptians_; and these _Egyptians_ abominated eating bread with the
_Hebrews_, at one and the same table: and of these _Egyptians_ and their
fellow-subjects, it is said a little after, that _every Shepherd is an
abomination to the _Egyptians__: _Egypt_ at this time was therefore under
the government of the genuine _Egyptians_, and not under that of the
Shepherds.

After the descent of _Jacob_ and his sons into _Egypt_, _Joseph_ lived 70
years, and so long continued in favour with the Kings of _Egypt_: and 64
years after his death _Moses_ was born: and between the death of _Joseph_
and the birth of _Moses_, _there arose up a new King over _Egypt_, which
knew not _Joseph__, _Exod._ i. 8. But this King of _Egypt_ was not one of
the Shepherds; for he is called _Pharaoh_, _Exod._ i. 11, 22: and _Moses_
told his successor, that if the people of _Israel_ should sacrifice in the
land of _Egypt_, _they should sacrifice the abomination of the _Egyptians_
before their eyes, and the _Egyptians_ would stone them_, _Exod._ viii. 26.
that is, they should sacrifice sheep or oxen, contrary to the religion of
_Egypt_. The Shepherds therefore did not Reign over _Egypt_ while _Israel_
was there, but either were driven out of _Egypt_ before _Israel_ went down
thither, or did not enter into _Egypt_ 'till after _Moses_ had brought
_Israel_ from thence: and the latter must be true, if they were driven out
of _Egypt_ a little before the building of the temple of _Solomon_, as
_Manetho_ affirms.

_Diodorus_ [258] saith in his 40th book, _that in _Egypt_ there were
formerly multitudes of strangers of several nations, who used foreign rites
and ceremonies in worshipping the Gods, for which they were expelled
_Egypt_; and under _Danaus_, _Cadmus_, and other skilful commanders, after
great hardships, came into _Greece_, and other places; but the greatest
part of them came into _Judæa_, not far from _Egypt_, a country then
uninhabited and desert, being conducted thither by one _Moses_, a wise and
valiant man, who after he had possest himself of the country, among other
things built _Jerusalem_, and the Temple._ _Diodorus_ here mistakes the
original of the _Israelites_, as _Manetho_ had done before, confounding
their flight into the wilderness under the conduct of _Moses_, with the
flight of the Shepherds from _Misphragmuthosis_, and his son _Amosis_, into
_Phœnicia_ and _Afric_; and not knowing that _Judæa_ was inhabited by
_Canaanites_, before the _Israelites_ under _Moses_ came thither: but
however, he lets us know that the Shepherds were expelled _Egypt_ by
_Amosis_, a little before the building of _Jerusalem_ and the Temple, and
that after several hardships several of them came into _Greece_, and other
places, under the conduct of _Cadmus_, and other Captains, but the most of
them Settled in _Phœnicia_ next _Egypt_. We may reckon therefore that the
expulsion of the Shepherds by the Kings of _Thebais_, was the occasion that
the _Philistims_ were so numerous in the days of _Saul_; and that so many
men came in those times with colonies out of _Egypt_ and _Phœnicia_ into
_Greece_; as _Lelex_, _Inachus_, _Pelasgus_, _Æzeus_, _Cecrops_,
_Ægialeus_, _Cadmus_, _Phœnix_, _Membliarius_, _Alymnus_, _Abas_,
_Erechtheus_, _Peteos_, _Phorbas_, in the days of _Eli_, _Samuel_, _Saul_
and _David_: some of them fled in the days of _Eli_, from
_Misphragmuthosis_, who conquered part of the lower _Egypt_; others retired
from his Successor _Amosis_ into _Phœnicia_, and _Arabia Petræa_, and there
mixed with the old inhabitants; who not long after being conquered by
_David_, fled from him and the _Philistims_ by sea, under the conduct of
_Cadmus_ and other Captains, into _Asia Minor_, _Greece_, and _Libya_, to
seek new seats, and there built towns, erected Kingdoms, and set on foot
the worship of the dead: and some of those who remained in _Judæa_ might
assist _David_ and _Solomon_, in building _Jerusalem_ and the Temple. Among
the foreign rites used by the strangers in _Egypt_, in worshipping the
Gods, was the sacrificing of men; for _Amosis_ abolished that custom at
_Heliopolis_: and therefore those strangers were _Canaanites_, such as fled
from _Joshua_; for the _Canaanites_ gave their seed, that is, their
children, to _Moloch_, _and burnt their sons and their daughters in the
fire to their Gods_, _Deut._ xii. 31. _Manetho_ calls them _Phœnician_
strangers.

After _Amosis_ had expelled the Shepherds, and extended his dominion over
all _Egypt_, his son and Successor _Ammenemes_ or _Ammon_, by much greater
conquests laid the foundation of the _Egyptian_ Empire: for by the
assistance of his young son _Sesostris_, whom he brought up to hunting and
other laborious exercises, he conquered _Arabia_, _Troglodytica_, and
_Libya_: and from him all _Libya_ was anciently called _Ammonia_: and after
his death, in the temples erected to him at _Thebes_, and in _Ammonia_ and
at _Meroe_ in _Ethiopia_, they set up Oracles to him, and made the people
worship him as the God that acted in them: and these are the oldest Oracles
mentioned in history; the _Greeks_ therein imitating the _Egyptians_: for
the [259] Oracle at _Dodona_ was the oldest in _Greece_, and was set up by
an _Egyptian_ woman, after the example of the Oracle of _Jupiter Ammon_ at
_Thebes_.

In the days of _Ammon_ a body of the _Edomites_ fled from _David_ into
_Egypt_, with their young King _Hadad_, as above; and carried thither their
skill in navigation: and this seems to have given occasion to the
_Egyptians_ to build a fleet on the _Red Sea_ near _Coptos_, and might
ingratiate _Hadad_ with _Pharaoh_: for the _Midianites_ and _Ishmaelites_,
who bordered upon the _Red Sea_, near _Mount Horeb_ on the south-side of
_Edom_, were merchants from the days of _Jacob_ the Patriarch, _Gen._
xxxvii. 28, 36. and by their merchandise the _Midianites_ abounded with
gold in the days of _Moses_, _Numb._ xxxi. 50, 51, 52. and in the days of
the judges of _Israel_, _because they were _Ishmaelites__, _Judg._ viii 24.
The _Ishmaelites_ therefore in those days grew rich by merchandise; they
carried their merchandise on camels through _Petra_ to _Rhinocolura_, and
thence to _Egypt_: and this trafic at length came into the hands of
_David_, by his conquering the _Edomites_, and gaining the ports of the
_Red Sea_ called _Eloth_ and _Ezion-Geber_, as may be understood by the
3000 talents of gold of _Ophir_, which _David_ gave to the Temple, 1
_Chron._ xxix. 4. The _Egyptians_ having the art of making linen-cloth,
they began about this time to build long Ships with sails, in their port on
those Seas near _Coptos_, and having learnt the skill of the _Edomites_,
they began now to observe the positions of the Stars, and the length of the
Solar Year, for enabling them to know the position of the Stars at any
time, and to sail by them at all times, without sight of the shoar: and
this gave a beginning to Astronomy and Navigation: for hitherto they had
gone only by the shoar with oars, in round vessels of burden, first
invented on that shallow sea by the posterity of _Abraham_, and in passing
from island to island guided themselves by the sight of the islands in the
day time, or by the sight of some of the Stars in the night. Their old year
was the Lunisolar year, derived from _Noah_ to all his posterity, 'till
those days, and consisted of twelve months, each of thirty days, according
to their calendar: and to the end of this calendar-year they now added five
days, and thereby made up the Solar year of twelve months and five days, or
365 days.

The ancient _Egyptians_ feigned [260] that _Rhea_ lay secretly with
_Saturn_, and _Sol_ prayed that she might bring forth neither in any month,
nor in the year; and that _Mercury_ playing at dice with _Luna_, overcame,
and took from the Lunar year the 72d part of every day, and thereof
composed five days, and added them to the year of 360 days, that she might
bring forth in them; and that the _Egyptians_ celebrated those days as the
birth-days of _Rhea_'s five children, _Osiris_, _Orus_ senior, _Typhon_,
_Isis_, and _Nephthe_ the wife of _Typhon_: and therefore, according to the
opinion of the ancient _Egyptians_, the five days were added to the
Lunisolar calendar-year, in the Reign of _Saturn_ and _Rhea_, the parents
of _Osiris_, _Isis_, and _Typhon_; that is, in the Reign of _Ammon_ and
_Titæa_, the parents of the _Titans_; or in the latter half of the Reign of
_David_, when those _Titans_ were born, and by consequence soon after the
flight of the _Edomites_ from _David_ into _Egypt_: but the Solstices not
being yet settled, the beginning of this new year might not be fixed to the
Vernal Equinox before the Reign of _Amenophis_ the successor of _Orus_
junior, the Son of _Osiris_ and _Isis_.

When the _Edomites_ fled from _David_ with their young King _Hadad_ into
_Egypt_, it is probable that they carried thither also the use of letters:
for letters were then in use among the posterity of _Abraham_ in _Arabia
Petræa_, and upon the borders of the _Red Sea_, the Law being written there
by _Moses_ in a book, and in tables of stone, long before: for _Moses_
marrying the daughter of the prince of _Midian_, and dwelling with him
forty years, learnt them among the _Midianites_: and _Job_, who lived [261]
among their neighbours the _Edomites_, mentions the writing down or words,
as there in use in his days, _Job._ xix. 23, 24. and there is no instance
of letters for writing down sounds, being in use before the days of
_David_, in any other nation besides the posterity of _Abraham_. The
_Egyptians_ ascribed this invention to _Thoth_, the secretary of _Osiris_;
and therefore Letters began to be in use in _Egypt_ in the days of _Thoth_,
that is, a little after the flight of the _Edomites_ from _David_, or about
the time that _Cadmus_ brought them into _Europe_.

_Helladius_ [262] tells us, that a man called _Oes_, who appeared in the
_Red Sea_ with the tail of a fish, so they painted a sea-man, taught
Astronomy and Letters: and _Hyginus_, [263] that _Euhadnes_, who came out
of the Sea in _Chaldæa_, taught the _Chaldæans_ Astrology the first of any
man; he means Astronomy: and _Alexander Polyhistor_ [264] tells us from
_Berosus_, that _Oannes_ taught the _Chaldæans_ Letters, Mathematicks,
Arts, Agriculture, Cohabitation in Cities, and the Construction of Temples;
and that several such men came thither successively. _Oes_, _Euhadnes_, and
_Oannes_, seem to be the same name a little varied by corruption; and this
name seems to have been given in common to several sea-men, who came
thither from time to time, and by consequence were merchants, and
frequented those seas with their merchandise, or else fled from their
enemies: so that Letters, Astronomy, Architecture and Agriculture, came
into _Chaldæa_ by sea, and were carried thither by sea-men, who frequented
the _Persian Gulph_, and came thither from time to time, after all those
things were practised in other countries whence they came, and by
consequence in the days of _Ammon_ and _Sesac_, _David_ and _Solomon_, and
their successors, or not long before. The _Chaldæans_ indeed made _Oannes_
older than the flood of _Xisuthrus_, but the _Egyptians_ made _Osiris_ as
old, and I make them contemporary.

The _Red Sea_ had its name not from its colour, but from _Edom_ and
_Erythra_, the names of _Esau_, which signify that colour: and some [265]
tell us, that King _Erythra_, meaning _Esau_, invented the vessels,
_rates_, in which they navigated that Sea, and was buried in an island
thereof near the _Persian Gulph_: whence it follows, that the _Edomites_
navigated that Sea from the days of _Esau_; and there is no need that the
oldest _Oannes_ should be older. There were boats upon rivers before, such
as were the boats which carried the Patriarchs over _Euphrates_ and
_Jordan_, and the first nations over many other rivers, for peopling the
earth, seeking new seats, and invading one another's territories: and after
the example of such vessels, _Ishhmael_ and _Midian_ the sons of _Abraham_,
and _Esau_ his grandson, might build larger vessels to go to the islands
upon the _Red Sea_, in searching for new seats, and by degrees learn to
navigate that sea, as far as to the _Persian Gulph_: for ships were as old,
even upon the _Mediterranean_, as the days of _Jacob_, _Gen._ xlix. 13.
_Judg._ v. 17. but it is probable that the merchants of that sea were not
forward to discover their Arts and Sciences, upon which their trade
depended: it seems therefore that Letters and Astronomy, and the trade of
Carpenters, were invented by the merchants of the _Red Sea_, for writing
down their merchandise, and keeping their accounts, and guiding their ships
in the night by the Stars, and building ships; and that they were
propagated from _Arabia Petræa_ into _Egypt_, _Chaldæa_, _Syria_, _Asia
minor_, and _Europe_, much about one and the same time; the time in which
_David_ conquered and dispersed those merchants: for we hear nothing of
Letters before the days of _David_, except among the posterity of
_Abraham_; nothing of Astronomy, before the _Egyptians_ under _Ammon_ and
_Sesac_ applied themselves to that study, except the Constellations
mentioned by _Job_, who lived in _Arabia Petræa_ among the merchants;
nothing of the trade of Carpenters, or good Architecture, before _Solomon_
sent to _Hiram_ King of _Tyre_, to supply him with such Artificers, saying
that _there were none in _Israel_ who could skill to hew timber like the
_Zidonians__.

_Diodorus_ [266] tells us, _that the _Egyptians_ sent many colonies out of
_Egypt_ into other countries; and that _Belus_, the son of _Neptune_ and
_Libya_, carried colonies thence into _Babylonia_, and seating himself on
_Euphrates_, instituted priests free from taxes and publick expences, after
the manner of _Egypt_, who were called _Chaldæans_, and who after the
manner of _Egypt_, might observe the Stars_: and _Pausanias_ [267] tells
us, _that the _Belus_ of the _Babylonians_ had his name from _Belus_ an
_Egyptian_, the son of _Libya__: and _Apollodorus_; [268] _that _Belus_ the
son of _Neptune_ and _Libya_, and King of _Egypt_, was the father of
_Ægyptus_ and _Danaus__, that is, _Ammon_: he tells us also, _that
_Busiris_ the son of _Neptune_ and _Lisianassa_ _[Libyanassa]_ the daughter
of _Epaphus_, was King of _Egypt__; and _Eusebius_ calls this King,
__Busiris_ the son of _Neptune_, and of _Libya_ the daughter of _Epaphus__.
By these things the later _Egyptians_ seem to have made two _Belus's_, the
one the father of _Osiris_, _Isis_, and _Neptune_, the other the son of
_Neptune_, and father of _Ægyptus_ and _Danaus_: and hence came the opinion
of the people of _Naxus_, that there were two _Minos's_ and two _Ariadnes_,
the one two Generations older than the other; which we have confuted. The
father of _Ægyptus_ and _Danaus_ was the father of _Osiris_, _Isis_, and
_Typhon_; and _Typhon_ was not the grandfather of _Neptune_, but _Neptune_
himself.

_Sesostris_ being brought up to hard labour by his father _Ammon_, warred
first under his father, being the Hero or _Hercules_ of the _Egyptians_
during his father's Reign, and afterward their King: under his father,
whilst he was very young, he invaded and conquered _Troglodytica_, and
thereby secured the harbour of the _Red Sea_, near _Coptos_ in _Egypt_, and
then he invaded _Ethiopia_, and carried on his conquest southward, as far
as to the region bearing cinnamon: and his father by the assistance of the
_Edomites_ having built a fleet on the _Red Sea_, he put to sea, and
coasted _Arabia Fælix_, going to the _Persian Gulph_ and beyond, and in
those countries set up Columns with inscriptions denoting his conquests;
and particularly he Set up a Pillar at _Dira_, a promontory in the straits
of the _Red Sea_, next _Ethiopia_, and two Pillars in _India_, on the
mountains near the mouth of the rivers _Ganges_; so [269] _Dionysius_:

  Ενθα τε και στηλαι, Θηβαιγενεος Διονυσου
  ‛Εστασιν πυματοιο παρα ‛ροον Ωκεανοιο,
  Ινδων ‛υστατιοισιν εν ουρεσιν· ενθα τε Γαγγης
  Λευκον ‛υδορ Νυσσαιον επι πλαταμωνα κυλινδει.

  _Ubi etiamnum columnæ Thebis geniti Bacchi_
  _Stant extremi juxta fluxum Oceani_
  _Indorum ultimis in montibus: ubi & Ganges_
  _Claram aquam Nyssæam ad planitiem devolvit_.

After these things he invaded _Libya_, and fought the _Africans_ with
clubs, and thence is painted with a club in his hand: so [270] _Hyginus_;
_Afri & Ægyptii primum fustibus dimicaverunt, postea Belus Neptuni filius
gladio belligeratus est, unde bellum dictum est_: and after the conquest of
_Libya_, by which _Egypt_ was furnished with horses, and furnished
_Solomon_ and his friends; he prepared a fleet on the _Mediterranean_, and
went on westward upon the coast of _Afric_, to search those countries, as
far as to the Ocean and island _Erythra_ or _Gades_ in _Spain_; as
_Macrobius_ [271] informs us from _Panyasis_ and _Pherecydes_: and there he
conquered _Geryon_, and at the mouth of the _Straits_ set up the famous
Pillars.

  [272] _Venit ad occasum mundique extrema Sesostris._

Then he returned through _Spain_ and the southern coasts of _France_ and
_Italy_, with the cattel of _Geryon_, his fleet attending him by sea, and
left in _Sicily_ the _Sicani_, a people which he had brought from _Spain_:
and after his father's death he built Temples to him in his conquests;
whence it came to pass, that _Jupiter Ammon_ was worshipped in _Ammonia_,
and _Ethiopia_, and _Arabia_, and as far as _India_, according to the [273]
Poet:

  _Quamvis Æthiopum populis, Arabumque beatis_
  _Gentibus, atque Indis unus sit Jupiter Ammon_.

The _Arabians_ worshipped only two Gods, _Cœlus_, otherwise called
_Ouranus_, or _Jupiter Uranius_, and _Bacchus_: and these were _Jupiter
Ammon_ and _Sesac_, as above: and so also the people of _Meroe_ above
_Egypt_ [274] worshipped no other Gods but _Jupiter_ and _Bacchus_, and had
an Oracle of _Jupiter_, and these two Gods were _Jupiter Ammon_ and
_Osiris_, according to the language of _Egypt_.

At length _Sesostris_, in the fifth year of _Rehoboam_, came out of _Egypt_
with a great army of _Libyans_, _Troglodytes_ and _Ethiopians_, and spoiled
the Temple, and reduced _Judæa_ into servitude, and went on conquering,
first eastward toward _India_, which he invaded, and then westward as far
as _Thrace_: for _God had given him the kingdoms of the countries_, 2
_Chron._ xii. 2, 3, 8. In [275] this Expedition he spent nine years,
setting up pillars with inscriptions in all his conquests, some of which
remained in _Syria_ 'till the days of _Herodotus_. He was accompanied with
his son _Orus_, or _Apollo_, and with some singing women, called _the
Muses_, one of which, called _Calliope_, was the mother of _Orpheus_ an
_Argonaut_: and the two tops of the mountain _Parnassus_, which were very
high, were dedicated [276] the one to this _Bacchus_, and the other to his
son _Apollo_: whence _Lucan_; [277]

          _Parnassus gemino petit æthera colle,_
  _Mons Phœbo, Bromioque sacer._

In the fourteenth year of _Rehoboam_ he returned back into _Egypt_; leaving
_Æetes_ in _Colchis_, and his nephew _Prometheus_ at mount _Caucasus_, with
part of his army, to defend his conquests from the _Scythians_. _Apollonius
Rhodius_ [278] and his scholiast tell us, that _Sesonchosis_ King of all
_Egypt_, that is _Sesac_, invading all _Asia_, and a great part of
_Europe_, peopled many cities which he took; and that _Æa_, the Metropolis
of _Colchis_, _remained stable ever since his days with the posterity of
those _Egyptians_ which he placed there, and that they preserved pillars or
tables in which all the journies and the bounds of sea and land were
described, for the use of them that were to go any whither_: these tables
therefore gave a beginning to Geography.

_Sesostris_ upon his returning home [279] divided _Egypt_ by measure
amongst the _Egyptians_; and this gave a beginning to Surveying and
Geometry: and [280] _Jamblicus_ derives this division of _Egypt_, and
beginning of Geometry, from the Age of the Gods of _Egypt_. _Sesostris_
also [281] divided _Egypt_ into 36 _Nomes_ or Counties, and dug a canal
from the _Nile_ to the head city of every _Nome_, and with the earth dug
out of it, he caused the ground of the city to be raised higher, and built
a Temple in every city for the worship of the _Nome_, and in the Temples
set up Oracles, some of which remained 'till the days of _Herodotus_: and
by this means the _Egyptians_ of every _Nome_ were induced to worship the
great men of the Kingdom, to whom the _Nome_, the City, and the Temple or
Sepulchre of the God, was dedicated: for every Temple had its proper God,
and modes of worship, and annual festivals, at which the Council and People
of the _Nome_ met at certain times to sacrifice, and regulate the affairs
of the _Nome_, and administer justice, and buy and sell; but _Sesac_ and
his Queen, by the names of _Osiris_ and _Isis_, were worshipped in all
_Egypt_: and because _Sesac_, to render the _Nile_ more useful, dug
channels from it to all the capital cities of _Egypt_; that river was
consecrated to him, and he was called by its names, _Ægyptus_, _Siris_,
_Nilus_. _Dionysius_ [282] tells us, that the _Nile_ was called _Siris_ by
the _Ethiopians_, and _Nilus_ by the people of _Siene_. From the word
_Nahal_, which signifies a torrent, that river was called _Nilus_; and
_Dionysius_ [283] tells us, that _Nilus_ was that King who cut _Egypt_ into
canals, to make the river useful: in Scripture the river is called
_Schichor_, or _Sihor_, and thence the _Greeks_ formed the words _Siris_,
_Sirius_, _Ser-Apis_, _O-Siris_; but _Plutarch_ [284] tells us, that the
syllable _O_, put before the word _Siris_ by the _Greeks_, made it scarce
intelligible to the _Egyptians_.

I have now told you the original of the _Nomes_ of _Egypt_ and of the
Religions and Temples of the _Nomes_, and of the Cities built there by the
Gods, and called by their names: whence _Diodorus_ [285] tells us, that _of
all the Provinces of the World, there were in _Egypt_ only many cities
built by the ancient Gods, as by _Jupiter_, _Sol_, _Hermes_, _Apollo_,
_Pan_, _Eilithyia_, and, many others_: and _Lucian_ [286] an _Assyrian_,
who had travelled into _Phœnicia_ and _Egypt_, tells us, that _the Temples
of _Egypt_ were very old, those in _Phœnicia_ built by _Cinyras_ as old,
and those in _Assyria_ almost as old as the former, but not altogether so
old_: which shews that the Monarchy of _Assyria_ rose up after the Monarchy
of _Egypt_; as is represented in Scripture; and that the Temples of _Egypt_
then standing, were those built by _Sesostris_, about the same time that
the Temples of _Phœnicia_ and _Cyprus_ were built by _Cinyras_, _Benhadad_,
and _Hiram_. This was not the first original of Idolatry, but only the
erecting of much more sumptuous Temples than formerly to the founders of
new Kingdoms: for Temples at first were very small;

  _Jupiter angusta vix totus stabat in æde._
      _Ovid. Fast._ l. 1.

Altars were at first erected without Temples, and this custom continued in
_Persia_ 'till after the days of _Herodotus_: in _Phœnicia_ they had Altars
with little houses for eating the sacrifices much earlier, and these they
called High Places: such was the High Place where _Samuel_ entertained
_Saul_; such was the House of _Dagon_ at _Ashdod_, into which the
_Philistims_ brought the Ark; and the House of _Baal_, in which _Jehu_ slew
the Prophets of _Baal_; and such were the High Places of the _Canaanites_
which _Moses_ commanded _Israel_ to destroy: he [287] commanded _Israel_ to
destroy the Altars, Images, High Places, and Groves of the _Canaanites_,
but made no mention of their Temples, as he would have done had there been
any in those days. I meet with no mention of sumptuous Temples before the
days of _Solomon_: new Kingdoms begun then to build Sepulchres to their
Founders in the form of Sumptuous Temples; and such Temples _Hiram_ built
in _Tyre_, _Sesac_ in all _Egypt_, and _Benhadad_ in _Damascus_.

For when _David_ [288] smote _Hadad Ezer_ King of _Zobah_, and slew the
_Syrians_ of _Damascus_ who came to assist him, _Rezon_ _the son of
_Eliadah_ fled from his lord _Hadad-Ezer_, and gathered men unto him and
became Captain over a band, and Reigned in _Damascus_, over _Syria__: he is
called _Hezion_, 1 _King._ xv. 18. and his successors mentioned in history
were _Tabrimon_, _Hadad_ or _Ben-hadad_, _Benhadad_ II. _Hazael_,
_Benhadad_ III. * * and _Rezin_ the son of _Tabeah_. _Syria_ became subject
to _Egypt_ in the days of _Tabrimon_, and recovered her liberty under
_Benhadad_ I; and in the days of _Benhadad_ III, until the reign of the
last _Rezin_, they became subject to _Israel_: and in the ninth year of
_Hoshea_ King of _Judah_, _Tiglath-pileser_ King of _Assyria_ captivated
the _Syrians_, and put an end to their Kingdom: now _Josephus_ [289] tells
us, that _the _Syrians_ 'till his days worshipped both _Adar__, that is
_Hadad_ or _Benhadad_, _and his successor _Hazael_ as Gods, for their
benefactions, and for building Temples by which they adorned the city of
_Damascus_: for_, saith he, _they daily celebrate solemnities in honour of
these Kings, and boast their antiquity, not knowing that they are novel,
and lived not above eleven hundred years ago_. It seems these Kings built
sumptuous Sepulchres for themselves, and were worshipped therein. _Justin_
[290] calls the first of these two Kings _Damascus_, saying that _the city
had its name from him, and that the _Syrians_ in honour of him worshipped
his wife _Arathes_ as a Goddess, using her Sepulchre for a Temple_.

Another instance we have in the Kingdom of _Byblus_. In the [291] Reign of
_Minos_ King of _Crete_, when _Rhadamanthus_ the brother of _Minos_ carried
colonies from _Crete_ to the _Greek_ islands, and gave the islands to his
captains, he gave _Lemnos_ to _Thoas_, or _Theias_, or _Thoantes_, the
father of _Hypsipyle_, a _Cretan_ worker in metals, and by consequence a
disciple of the _Idæi Dactyli_, and perhaps a _Phœnician_: for the _Idæi
Dactyli_, and _Telchines_, and _Corybantes_ brought their Arts and Sciences
from _Phœnicia_: and [292] _Suidas_ saith, that he was descended from
_Pharnaces_ King of _Cyprus_; _Apollodorus_, [293] that he was the son of
_Sandochus_ a _Syrian_; and _Apollonius Rhodius_, [294] that __Hypsipyle_
gave _Jason_ the purple cloak which the _Graces_ made for _Bacchus_, who
gave it to his son _Thoas__, the father of _Hypsipyle_, and King of
_Lemnos_: _Thoas_ married [295] _Calycopis_, the mother of _Æneas_, and
daughter of _Otreus_ King of _Phrygia_, and for his skill on the harp was
called _Cinyras_, and was said to be exceedingly beloved by _Apollo_ or
_Orus_: the great _Bacchus_ loved his wife, and being caught in bed with
her in _Phrygia_ appeased him with wine, and composed the matter by making
him King of _Byblus_ and _Cyprus_; and then came over the _Hellespont_ with
his army, and conquered _Thrace:_ and to these things the poets allude, in
feigning that _Vulcan_ fell from heaven into _Lemnos_, and that _Bacchus_
[296] appeased him with wine, and reduced him back into heaven: he fell
from the heaven of the _Cretan_ Gods, when he went from _Crete_ to _Lemnos_
to work in metals, and was reduced back into heaven when _Bacchus_ made him
King of _Cyprus_ and _Byblus_: he Reigned there 'till a very great age,
living to the times of the _Trojan_ war, and becoming exceeding rich: and
after the death of his wife _Calycopis_, [297] he built Temples to her at
_Paphos_ and _Amathus_, in _Cyprus_; and at _Byblus_ in _Syria_, and
instituted Priests to her with Sacred Rites and lustful _Orgia_; whence she
became the _Dea Cypria_, and the _Dea Syria_: and from Temples erected to
her in these and other places, she was also called _Paphia_, _Amathusia_,
_Byblia_, _Cytherea_ _Salaminia_, _Cnidia_, _Erycina_, _Idalia_. _Fama
tradit a Cinyra sacratum vetustissimum Paphiæ Veneris templum, Deamque
ipsam conceptam mari huc appulsam_: _Tacit. Hist._ l. 2. c. 3. From her
sailing from _Phrygia_ to the island _Cythera_, and from thence to be Queen
of _Cyprus_, she was said by the _Cyprians_, to be born of the froth of the
sea, and was painted sailing upon a shell. _Cinyras_ Deified also his son
_Gingris_, by the name of _Adonis_; and for assisting the _Egyptians_ with
armour, it is probable that he himself was Deified by his friends the
_Egyptians_, by the name of _Baal-Canaan_, or _Vulcan_: for _Vulcan_ was
celebrated principally by the _Egyptians_, and was a King according to
_Homer_, and Reigned in _Lemnos_; and _Cinyras_ was an inventor of arts,
[298] and found out copper in _Cyprus_, and the smiths hammer, and anvil,
and tongs, and laver; and imployed workmen in making armour, and other
things of brass and iron, and was the only King celebrated in history for
working in metals, and was King of _Lemnos_, and the husband of _Venus_;
all which are the characters of _Vulcan_: and the _Egyptians_ about the
time of the death of _Cinyras_, _viz._ in the Reign of their King
_Amenophis_, built a very sumptuous Temple at _Memphis_ to _Vulcan_, and
near it a smaller Temple to _Venus Hospita_; not an _Egyptian_ woman but a
foreigner, not _Helena_ but _Vulcan's Venus_: for [299] _Herodotus_ tells
us, that the region round about this Temple was inhabited by _Tyrian
Phœnicians_, and that [300] _Cambyses_ going into this Temple at _Memphis_,
very much derided the statue of _Vulcan_ for its littleness; _For_, saith
he, _this statue is most like those Gods which the _Phœnicians_ call
_Patæci_, and carry about in the fore part of their Ships in the form of
Pygmies_: and [301] _Bochart_ saith of this _Venus Hospita_, _Phœniciam
Venerem in Ægypto pro peregrina habitam._

As the _Egyptians_, _Phœnicians_ and _Syrians_ in those days Deified their
Kings and Princes, so upon their coming into _Asia minor_ and _Greece_,
they taught those nations to do the like, as hath been shewed above. In
those days the writing of the _Thebans_ and _Ethiopians_ was in
hieroglyphicks; and this way of writing seems to have spread into the lower
_Egypt_ before the days of _Moses_: for thence came the worship of their
Gods in the various shapes of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, forbidden in the
second commandment. Now this emblematical way of writing gave occasion to
the _Thebans_ and _Ethiopians_, who in the days of _Samuel_, _David_,
_Solomon_, and _Rehoboam_ conquered _Egypt_, and the nations round about,
and erected a great Empire, to represent and signify their conquering Kings
and Princes, not by writing down their names, but by making various
hieroglyphical figures; as by painting _Ammon_ with Ram's horns, to signify
the King who conquered _Libya_, a country abounding with sheep; his father
_Amosis_ with a Scithe, to signify that King who conquered the lower
_Egypt_, a country abounding with corn; his Son _Osiris_ by an Ox, because
he taught the conquered nations to plow with oxen; _Bacchus_ with Bulls
horns for the same reason, and with Grapes because he taught the nations to
plant vines, and upon a Tiger because he subdued _India_; _Orus_ the son of
_Osiris_ with a Harp, to signify the Prince who was eminently skilled on
that instrument; _Jupiter_ upon an Eagle to signify the sublimity of his
dominion, and with a Thunderbolt to represent him a warrior; _Venus_ in a
Chariot drawn with two Doves, to represent her amorous and lustful;
_Neptune_ with a Trident, to signify the commander of a fleet composed of
three Squadrons; _Ægeon_, a Giant, with 50 heads, and an hundred hands, to
signify _Neptune_ with his men in a ship of fifty oars; _Thoth_ with a
Dog's head and wings at his cap and feet, and a _Caduceus_ writhen about
with two Serpents, to signify a man of craft, and an embassador who
reconciled two contending nations; _Pan_ with a Pipe and the legs of a
Goat, to signify a man delighted in piping and dancing; and _Hercules_ with
Pillars and a Club, because _Sesostris_ set up pillars in all his
conquests, and fought against the _Libyans_ with clubs: this is that
_Hercules_ who, according to [302] _Eudoxus_, was slain by _Typhon_; and
according to _Ptolomæus Hephæstion_ [303] was called _Nilus_, and who
conquered _Geryon_ with his three sons in _Spain_, and set up the famous
pillars at the mouth of the _Straits_: for _Diodorus_ [304] mentioning
three _Hercules_'s, the _Egyptian_, the _Tyrian_, and the son of _Alcmena_,
saith that _the oldest flourished among the _Egyptians_, and having
conquered a great part of the world, set up the pillars in _Afric__: and
_Vasæus_, [305] that _Osiris_, called also _Dionysius_, _came into _Spain_
and conquered _Geryon_, and was the first who brought Idolatry into
_Spain__. _Strabo_ [306] tells us, that the _Ethiopians_ called _Megabars_
fought with clubs: and some of the _Greeks_ [307] did so 'till the times of
the _Trojan_ war. Now from this hieroglyphical way of writing it came to
pass, that upon the division of _Egypt_ into _Nomes_ by _Sesostris_, the
great men of the Kingdom to whom the _Nomes_ were dedicated, were
represented in their Sepulchers or Temples of the _Nomes_, by various
hieroglyphicks; as by an _Ox_, a _Cat_, a _Dog_, a _Cebus_, a _Goat_, a
_Lyon_, a _Scarabæus_, an _Ichneumon_, a _Crocodile_, an _Hippopotamus_, an
_Oxyrinchus_, an _Ibis_, a _Crow_, a _Hawk,_ a _Leek_, and were worshipped
by the _Nomes_ in the shape of these creatures.

The [308] _Atlantides_, a people upon mount _Atlas_ conquered by the
_Egyptians_ in the Reign of _Ammon_, related that _Uranus_ was their first
King, and reduced them from a savage course of life, and caused them to
dwell in towns and cities, and lay up and use the fruits of the earth, and
that he reigned over a great part of the world, and by his wife _Titæa_ had
eighteen children, among which were _Hyperion_ and _Basilea_ the parents of
_Helius_ and _Selene_; that the brothers of _Hyperion_ slew him, and
drowned his son _Helius_, the _Phaeton_ of the ancients, in the _Nile_, and
divided his Kingdom amongst themselves; and the country bordering upon the
Ocean fell to the lot of _Atlas_, from whom the people were called
_Atlantides_. By _Uranus_ or _Jupiter Uranius_, _Hyperion_, _Basilea_,
_Helius_ and _Selene_, I understand _Jupiter Ammon_, _Osiris_, _Isis_,
_Orus_ and _Bubaste_; and by the sharing of the Kingdom of _Hyperion_
amongst his brothers the _Titans_, I understand the division of the earth
among the Gods mentioned in the Poem of _Solon_.

For _Solon_ having travelled into _Egypt_, and conversed with the Priests
of _Sais_; about their antiquities, wrote a Poem of what he had learnt, but
did not finish it; [309] and this Poem fell into the hands of _Plato_ who
relates out of it, that at the mouth of the _Straits_ near _Hercules_'s
Pillars there was an Island called _Atlantis_, the people of which, nine
thousand years before the days of _Solon_, reigned over _Libya_ as far as
_Egypt_; and over _Europe_ as far as the _Tyrrhene_ sea; and all this force
collected into one body invaded _Egypt_ and _Greece_, and whatever was
contained within the Pillars of _Hercules_, but was resisted and stopt by
the _Athenians_ and other _Greeks_, and thereby the rest of the nations not
yet conquered were preserved: he saith also that in those days the Gods,
having finished their conquests, divided the whole earth amongst
themselves, partly into larger, partly into smaller portions, and
instituted Temples and Sacred Rites to themselves; and that the Island
_Atlantis_ fell to the lot of _Neptune_, who made his eldest Son _Atlas_
King of the whole Island, a part of which was called _Gadir_; and that _in
the history of the said wars mention was made of _Cecrops_, _Erechtheus_,
_Erichthonius_, and others before _Theseus_, and also of the women who
warred with the men, and of the habit and statue of _Minerva_, the study of
war in those days being common to men and women_. By all these
circumstances it is manifest that these Gods were the _Dii magni majorum
gentium_, and lived between the age of _Cecrops_ and _Theseus_; and that
the wars which _Sesostris_ with his brother _Neptune_ made upon the nations
by land and sea, and the resistance he met with in _Greece_, and the
following invasion of _Egypt_ by _Neptune_, are here described; and how the
captains of _Sesostris_ shared his conquests amongst themselves, as the
captains of _Alexander_ the great did his conquests long after, and
instituting Temples and Priests and sacred Rites to themselves, caused the
nations to worship them after death as Gods: and that the Island _Gadir_ or
_Gades_, with all _Libya_, fell to the lot of him who after death was
Deified by the name of _Neptune_. The time therefore when these things were
done is by _Solon_ limited to the age of _Neptune_, the father of _Atlas_;
for _Homer_ tells us, that _Ulysses_ presently after the _Trojan_ war found
_Calypso_ the daughter of _Atlas_ in the _Ogygian_ Island, perhaps _Gadir_;
and therefore it was but two Generations before the _Trojan_ war. This is
that _Neptune_, who with _Apollo_ or _Orus_ fortified _Troy_ with a wall,
in the Reign of _Laomedon_ the father of _Priamus_, and left many natural
children in _Greece_, some of which were _Argonauts_, and others were
contemporary to the _Argonauts_; and therefore he flourished but one
Generation before the _Argonautic_ expedition, and by consequence about 400
years before _Solon_ went into _Egypt_: but the Priests of _Egypt_ in those
400 years had magnified the stories and antiquity of their Gods so
exceedingly, as to make them nine thousand years older than _Solon_, and
the Island _Atlantis_ bigger than all _Afric_ and _Asia_ together, and full
of people; and because in the days of _Solon_ this great Island did not
appear, they pretended that it was sunk into the sea with all its people:
thus great was the vanity of the Priests of _Egypt_ in magnifying their
antiquities.

The _Cretans_ [310] affirmed that _Neptune was the man who set out a fleet,
having obtained this Præfecture of _his father_ Saturn; whence posterity
reckoned things done in the sea to be under his government, and mariners
honoured him with sacrifices_: the invention of tall Ships with sails [311]
is also ascribed to him. He was first worshipped in _Africa_, as
_Herodotus_ [312] affirms, and therefore Reigned over that province: for
his eldest son _Atlas_, who succeeded him, was not only Lord of the Island
_Atlantis_, but also Reigned over a great part of _Afric_, giving his name
to the people called _Atlantii_, and to the mountain _Atlas_, and the
_Atlantic Ocean_. The [313] outmost parts of the earth and promontories,
and whatever bordered upon the sea and was washed by it, the _Egyptians_
called _Neptys_; and on the coasts of _Marmorica_ and _Cyrene_, _Bochart_
and _Arius Montanus_ place the _Naphthuhim_, a people sprung from
_Mizraim_, _Gen._ x. 13; and thence _Neptune_ and his wife _Neptys_ might
have their names, the words _Neptune_, _Neptys_ and _Naphthuhim_,
signifying the King, Queen, and people of the sea-coasts. The _Greeks_ tell
us that _Japetus_ was the father of _Atlas_, and _Bochart_ derives
_Japetus_ and _Neptune_ from the same original: he and his son _Atlas_ are
celebrated in the ancient fables for making war upon the Gods of _Egypt_;
as when _Lucian_ [314] saith that _Corinth_ being full of fables, tells the
fight of _Sol_ and _Neptune_, that is, of _Apollo_ and _Python_, or _Orus_
and _Typhon_; and where _Agatharcides_ [315] relates how the Gods of
_Egypt_ fled from the Giants, 'till the _Titans_ came in and saved them by
putting _Neptune_ to flight; and where _Hyginus_ [316] tells the war
between the Gods of _Ægypt_, and the _Titans_ commanded by _Atlas_.

The _Titans_ are the posterity of _Titæa_, some of whom under _Hercules_
assisted the Gods, others under _Neptune_ and _Atlas_ warred against them:
_for which reason_, saith _Plutarch_, [317] _the Priests of _Egypt_
abominated the sea, and had _Neptune_ in no honour_. By _Hercules_, I
understand here the general of the forces of _Thebais_ and _Ethiopia_ whom
the Gods or great men of _Egypt_ called to their assistance, against the
Giants or great men of _Libya_, who had slain _Osiris_ and invaded _Egypt_:
for _Diodorus_ [318] saith that _when _Osiris_ made his expedition over the
world, he left his kinsman _Hercules_ general of his forces over all his
dominions, and _Antæus_ governor of _Libya_ and _Ethiopia__. _Antæus_
Reigned over all _Afric_ to the _Atlantic Ocean_, and built _Tingis_ or
_Tangieres_: _Pindar_ [319] tells us that he Reigned at _Irasa_ a town of
_Libya_, where _Cyrene_ was afterwards built: he invaded _Egypt_ and
_Thebais_; for he was beaten by _Hercules_ and the _Egyptians_ near _Antæa_
or _Antæopolis_, a town of _Thebais_; and _Diodorus_ [320] tells us that
_this town had its name from _Antæus_, whom _Hercules_ slew in the days of
_Osiris__. _Hercules_ overthrew him several times, and every time he grew
stronger by recruits from _Libya_, his mother earth; but _Hercules_
intercepted his recruits, and at length slew him. In these wars _Hercules_
took the _Libyan_ world from _Atlas_, and made _Atlas_ pay tribute out of
his golden orchard, the Kingdom of _Afric_. _Antæus_ and _Atlas_ were both
of them sons of _Neptune_ both of them Reigned over all _Libya_ and
_Afric_, between _Mount Atlas_ and the _Mediterranean_ to the very Ocean;
both of them invaded _Egypt_, and contended with _Hercules_ in the wars of
the Gods, and therefore they are but two names of one and the same man; and
even the name _Atlas_ in the oblique cases seems to have been compounded of
the name _Antæeus_ and some other word, perhaps the word _Atal_, cursed,
put before it: the invasion of _Egypt_ by _Antæus_, _Ovid_ hath relation
unto, where he makes _Hercules_ say,

          _Sævoque alimenta parentis_
  _Antæo eripui_.

This war was at length composed by the intervention of _Mercury_, who in
memory thereof was said to reconcile two contending serpents, by casting
his Ambassador's rod between them: and thus much concerning the ancient
state of _Egypt_, _Libya_, and _Greece_, described by _Solon_.

The mythology of the _Cretans_ differed in some things from that of _Egypt_
and _Libya_: for in the _Cretan_ mythology, _Cœlus_ and _Terra_, or
_Uranus_ and _Titæa_ were the parents of _Saturn_ and _Rhea_, and _Saturn_
and _Rhea_ were the parents of _Jupiter_ and _Juno_; and _Hyperion_,
_Japetus_ and the _Titans_ were one Generation older than _Jupiter_; and
_Saturn_ was expelled his Kingdom and castrated by his son _Jupiter_: which
fable hath no place in the mythology of _Egypt_.

During the Reign of _Sesac_, _Jeroboam_ being in subjection to _Egypt_; set
up the Gods of _Egypt_ in _Dan_ and _Bethel_; and _Israel was without the
true God, and without a teaching Priest and without law: and in those times
there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great
vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the countries; and nation was
destroyed of nation, and city of city: for God did vex them with all
adversity_. 2 _Chron_. xv. 3, 5, 6. But in the fifth year of _Asa_ the land
of _Judah_ became quiet from war, and from thence had quiet ten years; and
_Asa_ took away the altars of strange Gods, and brake down the Images, and
built the fenced cities of _Judah_ with walls and towers and gates and
bars, having rest on every side, and got up an army of 580000 men, with
which in the fifteenth year of his Reign he met _Zerah_ the _Ethiopian_,
who came out against him with an army of a thousand thousand _Ethiopians_
and _Libyans_: the way of the _Libyans_ was through _Egypt_, and therefore
_Zerah_ was now Lord of _Egypt_: they fought at _Mareshah_ near _Gerar_,
between _Egypt_ and _Judæa_, and _Zerah_ was beaten, so that he could not
recover himself: and from all this I seem to gather that _Osiris_ was slain
in the fifth year of _Asa_, and thereupon _Egypt_ fell into civil wars,
being invaded by the _Libyans_, and defended by the _Ethiopians_ for a
time; and after ten years more being invaded by the _Ethiopians_, who slew
_Orus_ the son and successor of _Osiris_, drowning him in the _Nile_, and
seized his Kingdom. By these civil wars of _Egypt_, the land of _Judah_ had
rest ten years. _Osiris_ or _Sesostris_ reigned long, _Manetho_ saith 48
years; and by this reckoning he began to Reign about the 17th year of
_Solomon_; and _Orus_ his son was drowned in the 15th year of _Asa_: for
_Pliny_ [321] tells us, _Ægyptiorum bellis attrita est Æthiopia, vicissim
imperitando serviendoque, clara & potens etiam usque ad Trojana bella
Memnone regnante_. _Ethiopia_, served _Egypt_ 'till the death of
_Sesostris_, and no longer; for _Herodotus_ [322] tells us that _he alone
enjoyed the Empire of _Ethiopia__: then the _Ethiopians_ became free, and
after ten years became Lords of _Egypt_ and _Libya_, under _Zerah_ and
_Amenophis_.

When _Asa_ by his victory over _Zerah_ became safe from _Egypt_, he
assembled all the people, and they offered sacrifices out of the spoils,
and entered into a covenant upon oath to seek the Lord; and in lieu of the
vessels taken away by _Sesac_, _he brought into the house of God the things
that his father had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, Silver
and Gold, and Vessels_. 2 _Chron._ xv.

When _Zerah_ was beaten, so that he could not recover himself, the people
[323] of the lower _Egypt_ revolted from the _Ethiopians_, and called in to
their assistance two hundred thousand _Jews_ and _Canaanites_; and under
the conduct of one _Osarsiphus_, a Priest of _Egypt_, called _Usorthon_,
_Osorchon_, _Osorchor_, and _Hercules Ægyptius_ by _Manetho_, caused the
_Ethiopians_ now under _Memnon_ to retire to _Memphis_: and there _Memnon_
turned the river _Nile_ into a new channel, built a bridge over it and
fortified that pass, and then went back into _Ethiopia_: but after thirteen
years, he and his young son _Ramesses_ came down with an army from
_Ethiopia_, conquered the lower _Egypt_, and drove out the _Jews_ and
_Phœnicians_; and this action the _Egyptian_ writers and their followers
call the second expulsion of the Shepherds, taking _Osarsiphus_ for
_Moses_.

_Tithonus_ a beautiful youth, the elder brother of _Priamus_, went into
_Ethiopia_, being carried thither among many captives by _Sesostris_: and
the _Greeks_, before the days of _Hesiod_, feigned that _Memnon_ was his
son: _Memnon_ therefore, in the opinion of those ancient _Greeks_, was one
Generation younger than _Tithonus_, and was born after the return of
_Sesostris_ into _Egypt_: suppose about 16 or 20 years after the death of
_Solomon_. He is said to have lived very long, and so might die about 95
years after _Solomon_, as we reckoned above: his mother, called _Cissia_ by
_Æschylus_, in a statue erected to her in _Egypt_, [324] was represented as
the daughter, the wife, and the mother of a King, and therefore he was the
son of a King; which makes it probable that _Zerah_, whom he succeeded in
the Kingdom of _Ethiopia_, was his father.

Historians [325] agree that _Menes_ Reigned in _Egypt_ next after the Gods,
and turned the river into a new channel, and built a bridge over it, and
built _Memphis_ and the magnificent Temple of _Vulcan_: he built _Memphis_
over-against the place where _Grand Cairo_ now stands, called by the
_Arabian_ historians _Mesir_: he built only the body of the Temple of
_Vulcan_, and his successors _Ramesses_ or _Rhampsinitus_, _Mœris_,
_Asychis_, and _Psammiticus_ built the western, northern eastern, and
southern portico's thereof: _Psammiticus_, who built the last portico of
this Temple, Reigned three hundred years after the victory of _Asa_ over
_Zerah_, and it is not likely that this Temple could be above three hundred
years in building, or that any _Menes_ could be King of all _Egypt_ before
the expulsion of the Shepherds. The last of the Gods of _Egypt_ was _Orus_,
with his mother _Isis_, and sister _Bubaste_, and secretary _Thoth_, and
unkle _Typhon_; and the King who reigned next after all their deaths, and
turned the river and built a bridge over it, and built _Memphis_ and the
Temple of _Vulcan_, was _Memnon_ or _Amenophis_, called by the _Egyptians_
_Amenoph_; and therefore he is _Menes_: for the names _Amenoph_, or
_Menoph_, and _Menes_ do not much differ; and from _Amenoph_ the city
_Memphis_ built by _Menes_ had its _Egyptian_ names _Moph_, _Noph_,
_Menoph_ or _Menuf_, as it is still called by the _Arabian_ historians: the
necessity of fortifying this place against _Osarsiphus_ gave occasion to
the building of it.

In the time of the revolt of the lower _Egypt_ under _Osarsiphus_, and the
retirement of _Amenophis_ into _Ethiopia_, _Egypt_ being then in the
greatest distraction, the _Greeks_ built the ship _Argo_, and sent in it
the flower of _Greece_ to _Æetes_ in _Colchis_, and to many other Princes
on the coasts of the _Euxine_ and _Mediterranean_ seas; and this ship was
built after the pattern of an _Egyptian_ ship with fifty oars, in which
_Danaus_ with his fifty daughters a few years before fled from _Egypt_ into
_Greece_, and was the first long ship with sails built by the _Greeks_: and
such an improvement of navigation, with a design to send the flower of
_Greece_ to many Princes upon the sea-coasts of the _Euxine_ and
_Mediterranean_ seas, was too great an undertaking to be set on foot,
without the concurrence of the Princes and States of _Greece_, and perhaps
the approbation of the _Amphictyonic_ Council; for it was done by the
dictate of the Oracle. This Council met every half year upon state-affairs
for the welfare of _Greece_, and therefore knew of this expedition, and
might send the _Argonauts_ upon an embassy to the said Princes; and for
concealing their design might make the fable of the golden fleece, in
relation to the ship of _Phrixus_ whose ensign was a golden ram: and
probably their design was to notify the distraction of _Egypt_, and the
invasion thereof by the _Ethiopians_ and _Israelites_, to the said Princes,
and to persuade them to take that opportunity to revolt from _Egypt_, and
set up for themselves, and make a league with the _Greeks_: for the
_Argonauts_ went through [326] the Kingdom of _Colchis_ by land to the
_Armenians_, and through _Armenia_ to the _Medes_; which could not have
been done if they had not made friendship with the nations through which
they passed: they visited also _Laomedon_ King of the _Trojans_, _Phineus_
King of the _Thracians_, _Cyzicus_ King of the _Doliones_, _Lycus_ King of
the _Mariandyni_, the coasts of _Mysia_ and _Taurica Chersonesus_, the
nations upon the _Tanais_, the people about _Byzantium_, and the coasts of
_Epirus_, _Corsica_, _Melita_, _Italy_, _Sicily_, _Sardinia_, and _Gallia_
upon the _Mediterranean_; and from thence they [327] crossed the sea to
_Afric_, and there conferred with _Euripylus_ King of _Cyrene_: and [328]
_Strabo_ tells us that _in _Armenia_ and _Media_, and the neighbouring
places, there were frequent monuments of the expedition of _Jason_; as also
about _Sinope_, and its sea-coasts, the _Propontis_ and the _Hellespont_,
and in the _Mediterranean__: and a message by the flower of _Greece_ to so
many nations could be on no other account than state-policy; these nations
had been invaded by the _Egyptians_, but after this expedition we hear no
more of their continuing in subjection to _Egypt_.

The [329] _Egyptians_ originally lived on the fruits of the earth, and
fared hardly, and abstained from animals, and therefore abominated
Shepherds: _Menes_ taught them to adorn their beds and tables with rich
furniture and carpets, and brought in amongst them a sumptuous, delicious
and voluptuous way of life: and about a hundred years after his death,
_Gnephacthus_ one of his successors cursed him for it, and to reduce the
luxury of _Egypt_, caused the curse to be entered in the Temple of
_Jupiter_ at _Thebes_; and by this curse the honour of _Menes_ was
diminished among the _Egyptians_.

The Kings of _Egypt_ who expelled the Shepherds and Succeeded them, Reigned
I think first at _Coptos_, and then at _Thebes_, and then at _Memphis_. At
_Coptos_ I place _Misphragmuthosis_ and _Amosis_ or _Thomosis_ who expelled
the Shepherds, and abolished their custom of sacrificing men, and extended
the _Coptic_ language, and the name of Αια Κοπτου, _Aegyptus_, to the
conquest. Then _Thebes_ became the Royal City of _Ammon_, and from him was
called _No-Ammon,_ and his conquest on the west of _Egypt_ was called
_Ammonia._ After him, in the same city of _Thebes_, Reigned _Osiris_,
_Orus_, _Menes_ or _Amenophis_, and _Ramesses_: but _Memphis_ and her
miracles were not yet celebrated in _Greece_; for _Homer_ celebrates
_Thebes_ as in its glory in his days, and makes no mention of _Memphis_.
After _Menes_ had built _Memphis, Mœris_ the successor of _Ramesses_
adorned it, and made it the seat of the Kingdom, and this was almost two
Generations after the _Trojan_ war. _Cinyras_, the _Vulcan_ who married
_Venus_, and under the Kings of _Egypt_ Reigned over _Cyprus_ and part of
_Phœnicia_, and made armour for those Kings, lived 'till the times of the
_Trojan_ war: and upon his death _Menes_ or _Memnon_ might Deify him, and
found the famous Temple of _Vulcan_ in that city for his worship, but not
live to finish it. In a plain [330] not far from _Memphis_ are many small
Pyramids, said to be built by _Venephes_ or _Enephes_; and I suspect that
_Venephes_ and _Enephes_ have been corruptly written for _Menephes_ or
_Amenophis_, the letters _AM_ being almost worn out in some old manuscript:
for after the example of these Pyramids, the following Kings, _Mœris_ and
his successors, built others much larger. The plain in which they were
built was the burying-place of that city, as appears by the Mummies there
found; and therefore the Pyramids were the sepulchral monuments of the
Kings and Princes of that city: and by these and such like works the city
grew famous soon after the days of _Homer_; who therefore flourished in the
Reign of _Ramesses_.

_Herodotus_ [331] is the oldest historian now extant who wrote of the
antiquities of _Egypt_, and had what he wrote from the Priests of that
country: and _Diodorus_, who wrote almost 400 years after him, and had his
relations also from the Priests of _Egypt_, placed many nameless Kings
between those whom _Herodotus_ placed in continual succession. The Priests
of _Egypt_ had therefore, between the days of _Herodotus_ and _Diodorus_,
out of vanity, very much increased the number of their Kings: and what they
did after the days of _Herodotus_, they began to do before his days; for he
tells us that they recited to him out of their books, the names of 330
Kings who Reigned after _Menes_, but did nothing memorable, except
_Nitocris_ and _Mœris_ the last of them: all these Reigned at _Thebes_,
'till _Mœris_ translated the seat of the Empire from _Thebes_ to _Memphis_.
After _Mœris_ he reckons _Sesostris_, _Pheron_, _Proteus_, _Rhampsinitus_,
_Cheops_, _Cephren_, _Mycerinus_, _Asychis_, _Anysis_, _Sabacon_, _Anysis_
again, _Sethon_, twelve contemporary Kings, _Psammitichus_, _Nechus_,
_Psammis_, _Apries_, _Amasis_, and _Psammenitus_. The _Egyptians_ had
before the days of _Solon_ made their monarchy 9000 years old, and now they
reckon'd to _Herodotus_ a succession of 330 Kings Reigning so many
Generations, that is about 11000 years, before _Sesostris_: but the Kings
who Reigned long before _Sesostris_ might Reign over several little
Kingdoms in several parts of _Egypt_, before the rise of their Monarchy;
and by consequence before the days of _Eli_ and _Samuel_, and so are not
under our consideration: and these names may have been multiplied by
corruption; and some of them, as _Athothes_ or _Thoth_, the secretary of
_Osiris_; _Tosorthrus_ or _Æsculapius_ a Physician who invented building
with square stones; and _Thuor_ or _Polybus_ the husband of _Alcandra_,
were only Princes of _Egypt_. If with _Herodotus_ we omit the names of
those Kings who did nothing memorable, and consider only those whose
actions are recorded, and who left splendid monuments of their having
Reigned over _Egypt_, such as were Temples, Statues, Pyramids, Obelisks,
and Palaces dedicated or ascribed to them, these Kings reduced into good
order will give us all or almost all the Kings of _Egypt_, from the days of
the expulsion of the Shepherds and founding of the Monarchy, downwards to
the conquest of _Egypt_ by _Cambyses_: for _Sesostris_ Reigned in the Age
of the Gods of _Egypt_: being Deified by the names of _Osiris_, _Hercules_
and _Bacchus_, as above; and therefore _Menes_, _Nitocris_, and _Mœris_ are
to be placed after him; _Menes_ and his son _Ramesses_ Reigned next after
the Gods, and therefore _Nitocris_ and _Mœris_ Reigned after _Ramesses_:
_Mœris_ is set down immediately before _Cheops_, three times in the
Dynastys of the Kings of _Egypt_ composed by _Eratosthenes_, and once in
the Dynasties of _Manetho_; and in the same Dynasties _Nitocris_ is set
after the builders of the three great Pyramids, and according to
_Herodotus_ her brother Reigned before her, and was slain, and she revenged
his death; and according to _Syncellus_ she built the third great Pyramid;
and the builders of the Pyramids Reigned at _Memphis_, and by consequence
after _Mœris_. Now from these things I gather that the Kings of _Egypt_
mentioned by _Herodotus_ ought to be placed in this order; _Sesostris_,
_Pheron_, _Proteus_, _Menes_, _Rhampsinitus_, _Mœris_, _Cheops_, _Cephren_,
_Mycerinus_, _Nitocris_, _Asychis_, _Anysis_, _Sabacon_, _Anysis_ again,
_Sethon_, twelve contemporary Kings, _Psammitichus_, _Nechus_, _Psammis_,
_Apries_, _Amasis_, _Psammenitus_.

_Pheron_ is by _Herodotus_ said to be the son and successor of _Sesostris_.
He was Deified by the name of _Orus_.

_Proteus_ Reigned in the lower _Egypt_ when _Paris_ sailed thither; that is
at the end of the _Trojan_ war, according to [332] _Herodotus_: and at that
time _Amenophis_ was King of _Egypt_ and _Ethiopia_: but in his absence
_Proteus_ might be governor of some part of the lower _Egypt_ under him;
for _Homer_ places _Proteus_ upon the sea-coasts, and makes him a sea God,
and calls him the servant of _Neptune_; and _Herodotus_ saith that he rose
up from among the common people, and that _Proteus_ was his name translated
into _Greek_, and this name in _Greek_ signifies only a Prince or
President. He succeeded _Pheron_, and was succeeded by _Rhampsinitus_
according to _Herodotus_; and so was contemporary to _Amenophis_.

_Amenophis_ Reigned next after _Orus_ and _Isis_ the last of the Gods; he
Reigned at first over all _Egypt_, and then over _Memphis_ and the upper
parts of _Egypt_; and by conquering _Osarsiphus_, who had revolted from
him, became King of all _Egypt_ again, about 51 years after the death of
_Solomon_. He built _Memphis_ and ordered the worship of the Gods of
_Egypt_, and built a Palace at _Abydus_, and the _Memnonia_ at _This_ and
_Susa_, and the magnificent Temple of _Vulcan_ in _Memphis_; the building
with square stones being found out before by _Tosorthrus_, the _Æsculapius_
of _Egypt_: he is by corruption of his name called _Menes_, _Mines_,
_Minæus_, _Mineus_, _Minies_, _Mnevis_, _Enephes_, _Venephes_,
_Phamenophis_, _Osymanthyas_, _Osimandes_, _Ismandes_, _Imandes_, _Memnon_,
_Arminon._

_Amenophis_ was succeeded by his son, called by _Herodotus_,
_Rhampsinitus_, and by others _Ramses_, _Ramises_, _Rameses_, _Ramesses_,
[333] _Ramestes_, _Rhampses_, _Remphis_. Upon an Obelisk erected by this
King in _Heliopolis_, and sent to _Rome_ by the Emperor _Constantius_, was
an inscription, interpreted by _Hermapion_ an _Egyptian_ Priest, expressing
that the King was long lived, and Reigned over a great part of the earth:
and _Strabo_, [334] an eye-witness, tells us, that in the monuments of the
Kings of _Egypt_, above the _Memnonium_ were inscriptions upon Obelisks,
expressing the riches of the Kings, and their Reigning as far as _Scythia_,
_Bactria_, _India_ and _Ionia_: and _Tacitus_ [335] tells us from an
inscription seen at _Thebes_ by _Cæsar Germanicus,_ and interpreted to him
by the _Egyptian_ Priests, that this King _Ramesses_ had an army of 700000
men, and Reigned over _Libya_, _Ethiopia_, _Media_, _Persia_, _Bactria_,
_Scythia_, _Armenia_, _Cappadocia_, _Bithynia_, and _Lycia_; whence the
Monarchy of _Assyria_ was not yet risen. This King was very covetous, and a
great collector of taxes, and one of the richest of all the Kings of
_Egypt_, and built the western portico of the Temple of _Vulcan_.

_Mœris_ inheriting the riches of _Ramesses_, built the northern portico of
that Temple more sumptuously, and made the Lake of _Mœris,_ with two great
Pyramids of brick in the midst of it: and for preserving the division of
_Egypt_ into equal shares amongst the soldiers, this King wrote a book of
surveying, which gave a beginning to Geometry. He is called also _Maris_,
_Myris_, _Meres_, _Marres_, _Smarres_; and more corruptly, by changing Μ
into Α, Τ, Β, Σ, YΧ, Λ, &c. _Ayres_, _Tyris_, _Byires_, _Soris_,
_Uchoreus_, _Lachares_, _Labaris_, &c.

_Diodorus_ [336] places _Uchoreus_ between _Osymanduas_ and _Myris_, that
is between _Amenophis_ and _Mœris_, and saith that he built _Memphis_, and
fortified it to admiration with a mighty rampart of earth, and a broad and
deep trench, which was filled with the water of the _Nile_, and made there
a vast and deep Lake for receiving the water of the _Nile_ in the time of
its overflowing, and built palaces in the city; and that this place was so
commodiously seated that most of the Kings who Reigned after him preferred
it before _Thebes_, and removed the Court from thence to this place, so
that the magnificence of _Thebes_ from that time began to decrease, and
that of _Memphis_ to increase, 'till _Alexander_ King of _Macedon_ built
_Alexandria_. These great works of _Uchoreus_ and those of _Mœris_ savour
of one and the same genius, and were certainly done by one and the same
King, distinguished into two by a corruption of the name as above; for this
Lake of _Uchoreus_ was certainly the same with that of _Mœris_.

After the example of the two brick Pyramids made by _Mœris_, the three next
Kings, _Cheops_, _Cephren_ and _Mycerinus_ built the three great Pyramids
at _Memphis_; and therefore Reigned in that city. _Cheops_ shut up the
Temples of the _Nomes_, and prohibited the worship of the Gods of _Egypt_,
designing no doubt to have been worshipped himself after death: he is
called also _Chembis_, _Chemmis_, _Chemnis_, _Phiops_, _Apathus_,
_Apappus_, _Suphis_, _Saophis_, _Syphoas_, _Syphaosis_, _Soiphis_,
_Syphuris_, _Anoiphis_, _Anoisis_: he built the biggest of the three great
Pyramids which stand together; and his brother _Cephren_ or _Cerpheres_
built the second, and his son _Mycerinus_ founded the third: this last King
was celebrated for clemency and justice; he shut up the dead body of his
daughter in a hollow ox, and caused her to be worshipped daily with odours:
he is called also _Cheres_, _Cherinus_, _Bicheres_, _Moscheres_,
_Mencheres_. He died before the third Pyramid was finished, and his sister
and successor _Nitocris_ finished it.

Then Reigned _Asychis_, who built the eastern portico of the Temple of
_Vulcan_ very splendidly, and among the small Pyramids a large Pyramid of
brick, made of mud dug out of the Lake of _Mœris_: and these are the Kings
who Reigned at _Memphis_, and spent their time in adorning that city, until
the _Ethiopians_ and the _Assyrians_ and others revolted, and _Egypt_ lost
all her dominion abroad, and became again divided into several small
Kingdoms.

One of those Kingdoms was I think at _Memphis_, under _Gnephactus_, and his
son and successor _Bocchoris_. _Africanus_ calls _Bocchoris_ a _Saite_; but
_Sais_ at this time had other Kings: _Gnephactus_, otherwise called
_Neochabis_ and _Technatis_, cursed _Menes_ for his luxury, and caused the
curse to be entered in the Temple of _Jupiter_ at _Thebes_; and therefore
Reigned over _Thebais_: and _Bocchoris_ sent in a wild bull upon the God
_Mnevis_ which was worshipped at _Heliopolis_. Another of those Kingdoms
was at _Anysis_, or _Hanes_, _Isa._ xxx. 4. under its King _Anysis_ or
_Amosis_; a third was at _Sais_, under _Stephanathis_, _Nechepsos_, and
_Nechus_; and a fourth was at _Tanis_ or _Zoan_, under _Petubastes_,
_Osorchon_ and _Psammis_: and _Egypt_ being weakened by this division, was
invaded and conquered by the _Ethiopians_ under _Sabacon_, who slew
_Bocchoris_ and _Nechus_, and made _Anysis_ fly. The Olympiads began in the
Reign of _Petubastes_, and the _Æra_ of _Nabonassar_ in the 22d year of the
Reign of _Bocchoris_, according to _Africanus_; and therefore the division,
of _Egypt_ into many Kingdoms began before the Olympiads, but not above the
length of two Kings Reigns before them.

After the study of Astronomy was set on foot for the use of navigation, and
the _Egyptians_ by the Heliacal Risings and Settings of the Stars had
determined the length of the Solar year of 365 days, and by other
observations had fixed the Solstices, and formed the fixt Stars into
Asterisms, all which was done in the Reign of _Ammon_, _Sesac_, _Orus_, and
_Memnon_; it may be presumed that they continued to observe the motions of
the Planets; for they called them after the names of their Gods; and
_Nechepsos_ or _Nicepsos_ King of _Sais_, by the assistance of _Petosiris_
a Priest of _Egypt_, invented Astrology, grounding it upon the aspects of
the Planets, and the qualities of the men and women to whom they were
dedicated: and in the beginning of the Reign of _Nabonassar_ King of
_Babylon_, about which time the _Ethiopians_ under _Sabacon_ invaded
_Egypt_, those _Egyptians_ who fled from him to _Babylon_, carried thither
the _Egyptian_ year of 365 days, and the study of Astronomy and Astrology,
and founded the _Æra_ of _Nabonassar_; dating it from the first year of
that King's Reign, which was the 22d year _of Bocchoris_ as above, and
beginning the year on the same day with the _Egyptians_ for the sake of
their calculations. So _Diodorus_ [337]: _they say that the _Chaldæans_ in
_Babylon_, being Colonies of the _Egyptians_, became famous for Astrology,
having learnt it from the Priests of _Egypt__: and _Hestiæus_, who wrote an
history of _Egypt_, speaking of a disaster of the invaded _Egyptians_,
saith [338] that _the Priests who survived this disaster, taking with them
the _Sacra_ of _Jupiter Enyalius_, came to _Sennaar_ in _Babylonia__. From
the 15th year of _Asa_, in which _Zerah_ was beaten, and _Menes_ or
_Amenophis_ began his Reign, to the beginning of the _Æra_ of _Nabonassar_,
were 200 years; and this interval of time allows room for about nine or ten
Reigns of Kings, at about twenty years to a Reign one with another; and so
many Reigns there were, according to the account set down above out of
_Herodotus_; and therefore that account, as it is the oldest, and was
received by _Herodotus_ from the Priests of _Thebes_, _Memphis_, and
_Heliopolis_, three principal cities of _Egypt_, agrees also with the
course of nature, and leaves no room for the Reigns of the many nameless
Kings which we have omitted. These omitted Kings Reigned before _Mœris_,
and by consequence at _Thebes_; for _Mœris_ translated the seat of the
Empire from _Thebes_ to _Memphis_: they Reigned after _Ramesses_; for
_Ramesses_ was the son and successor of _Menes_, who Reigned next after the
Gods. Now _Menes_ built the body of the Temple of _Vulcan_, _Ramesses_ the
first portico, and _Mœris_ the second portico thereof; but the _Egyptians_,
for making their Gods and Kingdom look ancient, have inserted between the
builders of the first and second portico of this Temple, three hundred and
thirty Kings of _Thebes_, and supposed that these Kings Reigned eleven
thousand years; as if any Temple could stand so long. This being a manifest
fiction, we have corrected it, by omitting those interposed Kings, who did
nothing, and placing _Mœris_ the builder of the second portico, next after
_Ramesses_ the builder of the first.

In the Dynasties of _Manetho_; _Sevechus_ is made the successor of
_Sabacon_, being his son; and perhaps he is the _Sethon_ of _Herodotus_,
who became Priest of _Vulcan_, and neglected military discipline: for
_Sabacon_ is that _So_ or _Sua_ with whom _Hoshea_ King of _Israel_
conspired against the _Assyrians_, in the fourth year of _Hezekiah_, _Anno
Nabonass._ 24. _Herodotus_ tells us twice or thrice, that _Sabacon_ after a
long Reign of fifty years relinquished _Egypt_ voluntarily, and that
_Anysis_ who fled from him, returned and Reigned again in the lower _Egypt_
after him, or rather with him: and that _Sethon_ Reigned after _Sabacon_,
and went to _Pelusium_ against the army of _Sennacherib_, and was relieved
with a great multitude of mice, which eat the bow-strings of the
_Assyrians_; in memory of which the statue of _Sethon_, seen by
_Herodotus_, [339] was made with a Mouse in its hand. A Mouse was the
_Egyptian_ symbol of destruction, and the Mouse in the hand of _Sethon_
signifies only that he overcame the _Assyrians_ with a great destruction.
The Scriptures inform us, that when _Sennacherib_ invaded _Judæa_ and
besieged _Lachish_ and _Libnah_, which was in the 14th year of _Hezekiah_,
_Anno Nabonass._ 34. the King of _Judah_ trusted upon _Pharaoh_ King of
_Egypt_, that is upon _Sethon_, and that _Tirhakah_ King of _Ethiopia_ came
out also to fight against _Sennacherib_, 2 _King._ xviii. 21. & xix. 9.
which makes it probable, that when _Sennacherib_ heard of the Kings of
_Egypt_ and _Ethiopia_ coming against him, he went from _Libnah_ towards
_Pelusium_ to oppose them, and was there surprized and set upon in the
night by them both, and routed with as great a slaughter as if the
bow-strings of the _Assyrians_ had been eaten by mice. Some think that the
_Assyrians_ were smitten by lightning, or by a fiery wind which sometimes
comes from the southern parts of _Chaldæa_. After this victory _Tirhakah_
succeeding _Sethon_, carried his arms westward through _Libya_ and _Afric_
to the mouth of the _Straits_: but _Herodotus_ tells us, that the Priests
of _Egypt_ reckoned _Sethon_ the last King of _Egypt_, who Reigned before
the division of _Egypt_ into twelve contemporary Kingdoms, and by
consequence before the invasion of _Egypt_ by the _Assyrians_.

For _Asserhadon_ King of _Assyria_, in the 68th year of _Nabonassar_, after
he had Reigned about thirty years over _Assyria_, invaded the Kingdom of
_Babylon_, and then carried into captivity many people from _Babylon_, and
_Cuthah_, and _Ava_, and _Hamath_, and _Sepharvaim_, placing them in the
Regions of _Samaria_ and _Damascus_: and from thence they carried into
_Babylonia_ and _Assyria_ the remainder of the people of _Israel_ and
_Syria_, which had been left there by _Tiglath-pileser_. This captivity was
65 years after the first year of _Ahaz_, _Isa_. vii. 1, 8. & 2. _King._ xv.
37. & xvi. 5. and by consequence in the twentieth year of _Manasseh_, _Anno
Nabonass._ 69. and then _Tartan_ was sent by _Asserhadon_ with an army
against _Ashdod_ or _Azoth_, a town at that time subject to _Judæa_, 2
_Chron._ xxvi. 6. and took it, _Isa._ xx. 1: and this post being secured,
the _Assyrians_ beat the _Jews_, and captivated _Manasseh_, and subdued
_Judæa_: and in these wars, _Isaiah_ was saw'd asunder by the command of
_Manasseh_, for prophesying against him. Then the _Assyrians_ invaded and
subdued _Egypt_ and _Ethiopia_, and carried the _Egyptians_ and
_Ethiopians_ into captivity, and thereby put an end to the Reign of the
_Ethiopians_ over _Egypt_, _Isa._ vii. 18. & viii. 7. & x. 11, 12, & xix.
23. & xx. 4. In this war the city _No-Ammon_ or _Thebes_, which had
hitherto continued in a flourishing condition, was miserably wasted and led
into captivity, as is described by _Nahum_, chap. iii. ver. 8, 9, 10; for
_Nahum_ wrote after the last invasion of _Judæa_ by the _Assyrians_, chap.
i. ver. 15; and therefore describes this captivity as fresh in memory: and
this and other following invasions of _Egypt_ under _Nebuchadnezzar_ and
_Cambyses_, put an end to the glory of that city. _Asserhadon_ Reigned over
the _Egyptians_ and _Ethiopians_ three years, _Isa._ xx. 3, 4. that is
until his death, which was in the year of _Nabonassar_ 81, and therefore
invaded _Egypt_, and put an end to the Reign of the _Ethiopians_ over the
_Egyptians_, in the year of _Nabonassar_ 78; so that the _Ethiopians_ under
_Sabacon_, and his successors _Sethon_ and _Tirhakah_, Reigned over _Egypt_
about 80 years: _Herodotus_ allots 50 years to _Sabacon_, and _Africanus_
fourteen years to _Sethon_, and eighteen to _Tirhakah_.

The division of _Egypt_ into more Kingdoms than one, both before and after
the Reign of the _Ethiopians_, and the conquest of the _Egyptians_ by
_Asserhadon_, the prophet _Isaiah_ [340] seems allude unto in these words:
_I will set_, saith he, _the _Egyptians_ against the _Egyptians_, and they
shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his
neighbour, city against city, and Kingdom against Kingdom, and the Spirit
of _Egypt_ shall fail.--And the _Egyptians_ will I give over into the hand
of a cruel Lord _[viz. _Asserhadon_]_ and a fierce King shall Reign over
them.--Surely the Princes of _Zoan_ _[Tanis]_ are fools, the counsel of the
wise Councellors of _Pharaoh_ is become brutish: how long say ye unto
_Pharaoh_, I am the son of the ancient Kings.--The Princes of _Zoan_ are be
come fools: the Princes of _Noph_ _[Memphis]_ are deceived,--even they that
were the stay of the tribes thereof.--In that day there shall be a high-way
out of _Egypt_ into _Assyria_, and the _Egyptians_ shall serve the
_Assyrians__.

After the death of _Asserhadon_, _Egypt_ remained subject to twelve
contemporary Kings, who revolted from the _Assyrians_, and Reigned together
fifteen years; including I think the three years of _Asserhadon_, because
the _Egyptians_ do not reckon him among their Kings. They [341] built the
Labyrinth adjoining to the Lake of _Mœris_ which was a very magnificent
structure, with twelve Halls in it, for their Palaces: and then
_Psammitichus_, who was one of the twelve, conquered all the rest. He built
the last Portico of the Temple of _Vulcan_, founded by _Menes_ about 260
years before, and Reigned 54 years, including the fifteen years of his
Reign with the twelve Kings. Then Reigned _Nechaoh_ or _Nechus_, 17 years;
_Psammis_ six years; _Vaphres_, _Apries_, _Eraphius_, or _Hophra_, 25
years; _Amasis_ 44 years; and _Psammenitus_ six months, according to
_Herodotus_. _Egypt_ was subdued by _Nebuchadnezzar_ in the last year but
one of _Hophra_, _Anno Nabonass._ 178, and remained in subjection to
_Babylon_ forty years, _Jer._ xliv. 30. & _Ezek._ xxix. 12, 13, 14, 17, 19.
that is, almost all the Reign of _Amasis_, a plebeian set over _Egypt_ by
the conqueror: the forty years ended with the death of _Cyrus_; for he
Reigned over _Egypt_ and _Ethiopia_, according to _Xenophon_. At that time
therefore those nations recovered their liberty; but after four or five
years more they were invaded and conquered by _Cambyses_, _Anno Nabonass._
223 or 224, and have almost ever since remained in servitude, as was
predicted by the Prophets.

The Reigns of _Psammitichus_, _Nechus_, _Psammis_, _Apries_, _Amasis_, and
_Psammenitus_, set down by _Herodotus_, amount unto 146½ years: and so many
years there were from the 78th year of _Nabonassar_, in which the dominion
of the _Ethiopians_ over _Egypt_ came to an end, unto the 224th year of
_Nabonassar_, in which _Cambyses_ invaded _Egypt_, and put an end to that
Kingdom: which is an argument that _Herodotus_ was circumspect and faithful
in his narrations, and has given us a good account of the antiquities of
_Egypt_, so far as the Priests of _Egypt_ at _Thebes_, _Memphis_, and
_Heliopolis_, and the _Carians_ and _Ionians_ inhabiting _Egypt_, were then
able to inform him: for he consulted them all; and the _Cares_ and
_Ionians_ had been in _Egypt_ from the time of the Reign of the twelve
contemporary Kings.

_Pliny_ [342] tells us, that the _Egyptian_ Obelisks were of a sort of
stone dug near _Syene_ in _Thebais_, and that the first Obelisk was made by
_Mitres_, who Reigned in _Heliopolis_; that is, by _Mephres_ the
predecessor of _Misphragmuthosis_; and that afterwards other Kings made
others: _Sochis_, that is _Sesochis_, or _Sesac_, four, each of 48 cubits
in length; _Ramises_, that is _Ramesses_, two; _Smarres_, that is _Mœris_,
one of 48 cubits in length; _Eraphius_, or _Hophra_, one of 48; and
_Nectabis_, or _Nectenabis_, one of 80. _Mephres_ therefore extended his
dominion over all the upper _Egypt_, from _Syene_ to _Heliopolis_, and
after him, _Misphragmuthosis_ and _Amosis_, Reigned _Ammon_ and _Sesac_,
who erected the first great Empire in the world: and these four, _Amosis_,
_Ammon_, _Sesac_, and _Orus_, Reigned in the four ages of the great Gods of
_Egypt_; and _Amenophis_ was the _Menes_ who Reigned next after them: he
was Succeeded by _Ramesses_, and _Mœris_, and some time after by _Hophra_.

_Diodorus_ [343] recites the same Kings of _Egypt_ with _Herodotus_, but in
a more confused order, and repeats some of them twice, or oftener, under
various names, and omits others: his Kings are these; _Jupiter Ammon_ and
_Juno_, _Osiris_ and _Isis_, _Horus_, _Menes_, _Busiris_ I, _Busiris_ II,
_Osymanduas_, _Uchoreus_, _Myris_, _Sesoosis_ I, _Sesoosis_ II, _Amasis_,
_Actisanes_, _Mendes_ or _Marrus_, _Proteus_, _Remphis_, _Chembis_,
_Cephren_, _Mycerinus_ or _Cherinus_, _Gnephacthus_, _Bocchoris_,
_Sabacon_, twelve contemporary Kings, _Psammitichus_, * * _Apries_,
_Amasis_. Here I take _Sesoosis_ I, and _Sesoosis_ II, _Busiris_ I, and
_Busiris_ II, to be the same Kings with _Osiris_ and _Orus_: also
_Osymanduas_ to be the same with _Amenophis_ or _Menes_: also _Amasis_, and
_Actisanes_, an _Ethiopian_ who conquered him, to be the same with _Anysis_
and _Sabacon_ in _Herodotus_: and _Uchoreus_, _Mendes_, _Marrus_, and
_Myris_, to be only several names of one and the same King. Whence the
catalogue of _Diodorus_ will be reduced to this: _Jupiter Ammon_ and
_Juno_; _Osiris_, _Busiris_ or _Sesoosis_, and _Isis_; _Horus_, _Busiris_
II, or _Sesoosis_ II; _Menes_, or _Osymanduas_; _Proteus_; _Remphis_ or
_Ramesses_; _Uchoreus_, _Mendes_, _Marrus_, or _Myris_; _Chembis_ or
_Cheops_; _Cephren_; _Mycerinus_; * * _Gnephacthus_; _Bocchoris_; _Amasis_,
or _Anysis_; _Actisanes_, or _Sabacon_; * twelve contemporary Kings;
_Psammitichus_; * * _Apries_; _Amasis_: to which, if in their proper places
you add _Nitocris_, _Asychis_, _Sethon_, _Nechus_, and _Psammis,_ you will
have the catalogue of _Herodotus_.

The Dynasties of _Manetho_ and _Eratosthenes_ seem to be filled with many
such names of Kings as _Herodotus_ omitted: when it shall be made appear
that any of them Reigned in _Egypt_ after the expulsion of the Shepherds,
and were different from the Kings described above, they may be inserted in
their proper places.

_Egypt_ was conquered by the _Ethiopians_ under _Sabacon_, about the
beginning of the _Æra_ of _Nabonassar_, or perhaps three or four years
before, that is, about three hundred years before _Herodotus_ wrote his
history; and about eighty years after that conquest, it was conquered again
by the _Assyrians_ under _Asserhadon_: and the history of _Egypt_ set down
by _Herodotus_ from the time of this last conquest, is right both as to the
number, and order, and names of the Kings, and as to the length of their
Reigns: and therein he is now followed by historians, being the only author
who hath given us so good a history of _Egypt_, for that interval of time.
If his history of the earlier times be less accurate, it was because the
archives of _Egypt_ had suffered much during the Reign of the _Ethiopians_
and _Assyrians_: and it is not likely that the Priests of _Egypt_, who
lived two or three hundred years after the days of _Herodotus_, could mend
the matter: on the contrary, after _Cambyses_ had carried away the records
of _Egypt_, the Priests were daily feigning new Kings, to make their Gods
and nation look ancient; as is manifest by comparing _Herodotus_ with
_Diodorus Siculus_, and both of them with what _Plato_ relates out of the
Poem of _Solon_: which Poem makes the wars of the great Gods of _Egypt_
against the _Greeks_, to have been in the days of _Cecrops_, _Erechtheus_
and _Erichthonius_, and a little before those of _Theseus_; these Gods at
that time instituting Temples and Sacred Rites to themselves. I have
therefore chosen to rely upon the stories related to _Herodotus_ by the
Priests of _Egypt_ in those days, and corrected by the Poem of _Solon_, so
as to make these Gods of _Egypt_ no older than _Cecrops_ and _Erechtheus_,
and their successor _Menes_ no older than _Theseus_ and _Memnon_, and the
Temple of _Vulcan_ not above 280 years in building: rather than to correct
_Herodotus_ by _Manetho_, _Eratosthenes_, _Diodorus_, and others, who lived
after the Priests of _Egypt_ had corrupted their Antiquities much more than
they had done in the days of _Herodotus_.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. III.

_Of the _ASSYRIAN_ Empire._

As the Gods or ancient Deified Kings and Princes of _Greece_, _Egypt_, and
_Syria_ of _Damascus_, have been made much ancienter than the truth, so
have those of _Chaldæa_ and _Assyria_: for _Diodorus_ [344] tells us, that
when _Alexander_ the great was in _Asia_, the _Chaldæans_ reckoned 473000
years since they first began to observe the Stars; and _Ctesias_, and the
ancient _Greek_ and _Latin_ writers who copy from him, have made the
_Assyrian_ Empire as old as _Noah_'s flood within 60 or 70 years, and tell
us the names of all the Kings of _Assyria_ downwards, from _Belus_ and his
feigned son _Ninus_, to _Sardanapalus_ the last King of that Monarchy: but
the names of his Kings, except two or three, have no affinity with the
names of the _Assyrians_ mentioned in Scripture; for the _Assyrians_ were
usually named after their Gods, _Bel_ or _Pul_; _Chaddon_, _Hadon_, _Adon_,
or _Adonis_; _Melech_ or _Moloch_; _Atsur_ or _Assur_; _Nebo_; _Nergal_;
_Merodach_: as in these names, _Pul_, _Tiglath-Pul-Assur_, _Salman-Assur_,
_Adra-Melech_, _Shar-Assur_, _Assur-Hadon_, _Sardanapalus_ or
_Assur-Hadon-Pul_, _Nabonassar_ or _Nebo-Adon-Assur_, _Bel Adon_,
_Chiniladon_ or _Chen-El-Adon_, _Nebo-Pul-Assur_, _Nebo-Chaddon-Assur_,
_Nebuzaradon_ or _Nebo-Assur-Adon_, _Nergal-Assur_, _Nergal-Shar-Assur_,
_Labo-Assur-dach_, _Sheseb-Assur_, _Beltes-Assur_, _Evil-Merodach_,
_Shamgar-Nebo_, _Rabsaris_ or _Rab-Assur_, _Nebo-Shashban_, _Mardocempad_
or _Merodach-Empad_. Such were the _Assyrian_ names; but those in _Ctesias_
are of another sort, except _Sardanapalus_, whose name he had met with in
_Herodotus_. He makes _Semiramis_ as old as the first _Belus_; but
_Herodotus_ tells us, that she was but five Generations older than the
mother of _Labynetus_: he represents that the city _Ninus_ was founded by a
man of the same name, and _Babylon_ by _Semiramis_; whereas either _Nimrod_
or _Assur_ founded those and other cities, without giving his own name to
any of them: he makes the _Assyrian_ Empire continue about 1360 years,
whereas _Herodotus_ tells us that it lasted only 500 years, and the numbers
of _Herodotus_ concerning those ancient times are all of them too long: he
makes _Nineveh_ destroyed by the _Medes_ and _Babylonians_, three hundred
years before the Reign of _Astibares_ and _Nebuchadnezzar_ who destroyed
it, and sets down the names of seven or eight feigned Kings of _Media_,
between the destruction of _Nineveh_ and the Reigns of _Astibares_ and
_Nebuchadnezzar_, as if the Empire of the _Medes_, erected upon the ruins
of the _Assyrian_ Empire, had lasted 300 years, whereas it lasted but 72:
and the true Empire of the _Assyrians_ described in Scripture, whose Kings
were _Pul_, _Tiglath-pilesar_, _Shalmaneser_, _Sennacherib_, _Asserhadon_,
&c. he mentions not, tho' much nearer to his own times; which shews that he
was ignorant of the antiquities of the _Assyrians_. Yet something of truth
there is in the bottom of some of his stories, as there uses to be in
Romances; as, that _Nineveh_ was destroyed by the _Medes_ and
_Babylonians_; that _Sardanapalus_ was the last King of the _Assyrian_
Empire; and that _Astibares_ and _Astyages_ were Kings of the _Medes_: but
he has made all things too ancient, and out of vainglory taken too great a
liberty in feigning names and stories to please his reader.

When the _Jews_ were newly returned from the _Babylonian_ captivity, they
confessed their Sins in this manner, _Now therefore our God, ---- let not
all the trouble seem little before thee that hath come upon us, on our
Kings, on our Princes, and on our Priests, and on our Prophets, and on our
fathers, and on all thy people, since the time of the Kings of _Assyria_,
unto this day_; _Nehem._ ix. 32. that is, since the time of the Kingdom of
_Assyria_, or since the rise of that Empire; and therefore the _Assyrian_
Empire arose when the Kings of _Assyria_ began to afflict the inhabitants
of _Palestine_; which was in the days of _Pul_: he and his successors
afflicted _Israel_, and conquered the nations round about them; and upon
the ruin of many small and ancient Kingdoms erected their Empire,
conquering the _Medes_ as well as other nations: but of these conquests
_Ctesias_ knew not a word, no not so much as the names of the conquerors,
or that there was an _Assyrian_ Empire then standing; for he supposes that
the _Medes_ Reigned at that time, and that the _Assyrian_ Empire was at an
end above 250 years before it began.

However we must allow that _Nimrod_ founded a Kingdom at _Babylon_, and
perhaps extended it into _Assyria_: but this Kingdom was but of small
extent, if compared with the Empires which rose up afterwards; being only
within the fertile plains of _Chaldæa_, _Chalonitis_ and _Assyria_, watered
by the _Tigris_ and _Euphrates_: and if it had been greater, yet it was but
of short continuance, it being the custom in those early ages for every
father to divide his territories amongst his sons. So _Noah_ was King of
all the world, and _Cham_ was King of all _Afric_, and _Japhet_ of all
_Europe_ and _Asia minor_; but they left no standing Kingdoms. After the
days of _Nimrod_, we hear no more of an _Assyrian_ Empire 'till the days of
_Pul_. The four Kings who in the days of _Abraham_ invaded the southern
coast of _Canaan_ came from the countries where _Nimrod_ had Reigned, and
perhaps were some of his posterity who had shared his conquests. In the
time of the Judges of _Israel_, _Mesopotamia_ was under its own King,
_Judg._ iii. 8. and the King of _Zobah_ Reigned on both sides of the River
_Euphrates_ 'till _David_ conquered him, 2 _Sam._ viii, and x. The Kingdoms
of _Israel_, _Moab_, _Ammon_, _Edom_, _Philistia_, _Zidon_, _Damascus_, and
_Hamath_ the great, continued subject to other Lords than the _Assyrians_
'till the days of _Pul_ and his successors; and so did the house of _Eden_,
_Amos_ i. 5. 2 _Kings_ xix. 12. and _Haran_ or _Carrhæ_, _Gen._ xii. 2
_Kings_ xix. 12. and _Sepharvaim_ in _Mesopotamia_, and _Calneh_ near
_Bagdad_, _Gen._ x. 10, _Isa._ x. 9, 2 _Kings_ xvii. 31. _Sesac_ and
_Memnon_ were great conquerors, and Reigned over _Chaldæa_, _Assyria_, and
_Persia_, but in their histories there is not a word of any opposition made
to them by an _Assyrian_ Empire then standing: on the contrary, _Susiana_,
_Media_, _Persia_, _Bactria_, _Armenia_, _Cappadocia_, &c. were conquered
by them, and continued subject to the Kings of _Egypt_ 'till after the long
Reign of _Ramesses_ the son of _Memnon_, as above.

_Homer_ mentions _Bacchus_ and _Memnon_ Kings of _Egypt_ and _Persia_, but
knew nothing of an _Assyrian_ Empire. _Jonah_ prophesied when _Israel_ was
in affliction under the King of _Syria_, and this was in the latter part of
the Reign of _Jehoahaz_, and first part of the Reign of _Joash_, Kings of
_Israel_, and I think in the Reign of _Mœris_ the successor of _Ramesses_
King of _Egypt_, and about sixty years before the Reign of _Pul_; and
_Nineveh_ was then a city of large extent, but full of pastures for cattle,
so that it contained but about 120000 persons. It was not yet grown so
great and potent as not to be terrified at the preaching of _Jonah_, and to
fear being invaded by its neighbours and ruined within forty days: it had
some time before got free from the dominion of _Egypt_, and had got a King
of its own; but its King was not yet called King of _Assyria_, but only
King of _Nineveh_, _Jonah_ iii. 6, 7. and his proclamation for a fast was
not published in several nations, nor in all _Assyria_, but only in
_Nineveh_, and perhaps in the villages thereof; but soon after, when the
dominion of _Nineveh_ was established at home, and exalted over all
_Assyria_ properly so called, and this Kingdom began to make war upon the
neighbouring nations, its Kings were no longer called Kings of _Nineveh_
but began to be called Kings of _Assyria_.

_Amos_ prophesied in the Reign of _Jeroboam_ the Son of _Joash_ King of
_Israel_, soon after _Jeroboam_ had subdued the Kingdoms of _Damascus_ and
_Hamath_, that is, about ten or twenty years before the Reign of _Pul_: and
he [345] thus reproves _Israel_ for being lifted up by those conquests; _Ye
which rejoyce in a thing of nought, which say, have we not taken to us
horns by our strength? But behold I will raise up against you a nation, O
house of _Israel_, saith the Lord the God of Hosts, and they shall afflict
you from the entring in of _Hamath_ unto the river of the wilderness_. God
here threatens to raise up a nation against _Israel_; but what nation he
names not; that he conceals 'till the _Assyrians_ should appear and
discover it. In the prophesies of _Isaiah_, _Jeremiah_, _Ezekiel_, _Hosea_,
_Micah_, _Nahum_, _Zephaniah_ and _Zechariah_, which were written after the
Monarchy grew up, it is openly named upon all occasions; but in this of
_Amos_ not once, tho' the captivity of _Israel_ and _Syria_ be the subject
of the prophesy, and that of _Israel_ be often threatned: he only saith in
general that _Syria_ should go into captivity unto _Kir_, and that
_Israel_, notwithstanding her present greatness, should go into captivity
beyond _Damascus_; and that God would raise up a nation to afflict them:
meaning that he would raise up above them from a lower condition, a nation
whom they yet feared not: for so the _Hebrew_ word מקם signifies when
applied to men, as in _Amos_ v. 2. 1 _Sam._ xii. 11. _Psal._ cxiii. 7.
_Jer._ x. 20. l. 32. _Hab._ i. 6. _Zech._ xi. 16. As _Amos_ names not the
_Assyrians_; at the writing of this prophecy they made no great figure in
the world, but were to be raised up against _Israel_, and by consequence
rose up in the days of _Pul_ and his successors: for after _Jeroboam_ had
conquered _Damascus_ and _Hamath_, his successor _Menahem_ destroyed
_Tiphsah_ with its territories upon _Euphrates_, because they opened not to
him: and therefore _Israel_ continued in its greatness 'till _Pul_,
probably grown formidable by some victories, caused _Menahem_ to buy his
peace. _Pul_ therefore Reigning presently after the prophesy of _Amos_, and
being the first upon record who began to fulfill it, may be justly reckoned
the first conqueror and founder of this Empire. For _God stirred up the
spirit of _Pul_, and the spirit of _Tiglath-pileser_ King of _Assyria__, 1
_Chron._ v. 20.

The same Prophet _Amos_, in prophesying against _Israel_, threatned them in
this manner, with what had lately befallen other Kingdoms: _Pass ye_, [346]
saith he, _unto _Calneh_ and see, and from thence go ye to _Hamath_ the
great, then go down to _Gath_ of the _Philistims_. Be they better than
these Kingdoms?_ These Kingdoms were not yet conquered by the _Assyrians_,
except that of _Calneh_ or _Chalonitis_ upon _Tigris_, between _Babylon_
and _Nineveh_. _Gath_ was newly vanquished [347] by _Uzziah_ King of
_Judah_, and _Hamath_ [348] by _Jeroboam_ King of _Israel_: and while the
Prophet, in threatning _Israel_ with the _Assyrians_, instances in
desolations made by other nations, and mentions no other conquest of the
_Assyrians_ than that of _Chalonitis_ near _Nineveh_; it argues that the
King of _Nineveh_ was now beginning his conquests, and had not yet made any
great progress in that vast career of victories, which we read of a few
years after.

For about seven years after the captivity of the ten Tribes, when
_Sennacherib_ warred in _Syria_, which was in the 16th Olympiad, he [349]
sent this message to the King of _Judah_: _Behold, thou hast heard that the
Kings of _Assyria_ have done to all Lands by destroying them utterly, and
shalt thou be delivered? Have the Gods of the nations delivered them which
the Gods of my fathers have destroyed, as _Gozan_ and _Haran_ and _Reseph_,
and the children of _Eden_ which were in _[the Kingdom of] Thelasar_? Where
is the King of _Hamath_, and the King of _Arpad_, and the King of the city
of _Sepharvaim_, and of _Hena_ and _Ivah__? And _Isaiah_ [350] thus
introduceth the King of _Assyria_ boasting: _Are not my Princes altogether
as Kings? Is not _Calno [or _Calneh_]_ as _Carchemish_? Is not _Hamath_ as
_Arpad_? Is not _Samaria_ as _Damascus_? As my hand hath found the Kingdoms
of the Idols, and whose graven Images did excel them of _Jerusalem_ and of
_Samaria_; shall I not as I have done unto _Samaria_ and her Idols, so do
to _Jerusalem_ and her Idols?_ All this desolation is recited as fresh in
memory to terrify the _Jews_, and these Kingdoms reach to the borders of
_Assyria_, and to shew the largeness of the conquests they are called _all
lands_, that is, all round about _Assyria_. It was the custom of the Kings
of _Assyria_, for preventing the rebellion of people newly conquered, to
captivate and transplant those of several countries into one another's
lands, and intermix them variously: and thence it appears [351] that
_Halah_, and _Habor_, and _Hara_, and _Gozan_, and the cities of the
_Medes_ into which _Galilee_ and _Samaria_ were transplanted; and _Kir_
into which _Damascus_ was transplanted; and _Babylon_ and _Cuth_ or the
_Susanchites_, and _Hamath_, and _Ava_, and _Sepharvaim_, and the
_Dinaites_, and the _Apharsachites_, and the _Tarpelites_, and the
_Archevites_, and the _Dehavites_, and the _Elamites_, or _Persians_, part
of all which nations were led captive by _Asserhadon_ and his predecessors
into _Samaria_; were all of them conquered by the _Assyrians_ not long
before.

In these conquests are involved on the west and south side of _Assyria_,
the Kingdoms of _Mesopotamia_, whose royal seats were _Haran_ or _Carrhæ_,
and _Carchemish_ or _Circutium_, and _Sepharvaim_, a city upon _Euphrates_,
between _Babylon_ and _Nineveh_, called _Sipparæ_ by _Berosus_, _Abydenus_,
and _Polyhistor_, and _Sipphara_ by _Ptolomy_; and the Kingdoms of _Syria_
seated at _Samaria_, _Damascus_, _Gath_, _Hamath_, _Arpad_, and _Reseph_, a
city placed by _Ptolomy_ near _Thapsacus_: on the south side and south east
side were _Babylon_ and _Calneh_, or _Calno_, a city which was founded by
_Nimrod_, where _Bagdad_ now stands, and gave the name of _Chalonitis_ to a
large region under its government; and _Thelasar_ or _Talatha_, a city of
the children of _Eden_, placed by _Ptolomy_ in _Babylonia_, upon the common
stream of _Tigris_ and _Euphrates_, which was therefore the river of
Paradise; and the _Archevites_ at _Areca_ or _Erech_, a city built by
_Nimrod_ on the east side of _Pasitigris_, between _Apamia_ and the
_Persian Gulph_; and the _Susanchites_ at _Cuth_, or _Susa_, the metropolis
of _Susiana_: on the east were _Elymais_, and some cities of the _Medes_,
and _Kir_, [352] a city and large region of _Media_, between _Elymais_, and
_Assyria_, called _Kirene_ by the _Chaldee_ Paraphrast and _Latin_
Interpreter, and _Carine_ by _Ptolomy_: on the north-east were _Habor_ or
_Chaboras_, a mountainous region between _Assyria_ and _Media_; and the
_Apharsachites_, or men of _Arrapachitis_, a region originally peopled by
_Arphaxad_, and placed by _Ptolomy_ at the bottom of the mountains next
_Assyria_: and on the north between _Assyria_ and the _Gordiæan_ mountains
was _Halah_ or _Chalach_, the metropolis of _Calachene_: and beyond these
upon the _Caspian_ sea was _Gozan_, called _Gauzania_ by _Ptolomy_. Thus
did these new conquests extend every way from the province of _Assyria_ to
considerable distances, and make up the great body of that Monarchy: so
that well might the King of _Assyria_ boast how his armies had destroyed
all lands. All these nations [353] had 'till now their several Gods, and
each accounted his God the God of his own land, and the defender thereof,
against the Gods of the neighbouring countries, and particularly against
the Gods of _Assyria_; and therefore they were never 'till now united under
the _Assyrian_ Monarchy, especially since the King of _Assyria_ doth not
boast of their being conquered by the _Assyrians_ oftner than once: but
these being small Kingdoms the King of _Assyria_ easily overflowed them:
_Know ye not_, saith [354] _Sennacherib_ to the _Jews_, _what I and my
fathers have done unto all the People of other lands?--for no God of any
nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people out of mine hand, and out
of the hand of my fathers: how much less shall your God deliver you out of
mine hand?_ He and his fathers therefore, _Pul_, _Tiglath-pileser_, and
_Shalmaneser_, were great conquerors, and with a current of victories had
newly overflowed all nations round about _Assyria_, and thereby set up this
Monarchy.

Between the Reigns of _Jeroboam_ II, and his son _Zachariah_, there was an
interregnum of about ten or twelve years in the Kingdom of _Israel_: and
the prophet _Hosea_ [355] in the time of that interregnum, or soon after,
mentions the King of _Assyria_ by the name of _Jareb_, and another
conqueror by the name of _Shalman_; and perhaps _Shalman_ might be the
first part of the name of _Shalmaneser_, and _Iareb_, or _Irib_, for it may
be read both ways, the last part of the name of his successor
_Sennacherib_: but whoever these Princes were, it appears not that they
Reigned before _Shalmaneser_. _Pul_, or _Belus_, seems to be the first who
carried on his conquests beyond the province of _Assyria_: he conquered
_Calneh_ with its territories in the Reign of _Jerboam_, _Amos_ i. 1. vi.
2. & _Isa._ x. 8, 9. and invaded _Israel_ in the Reign of _Menahem_, 2
_King._ xv. 19. but stayed not in the land, being bought off by _Menahem_
for a thousand talents of silver: in his Reign therefore the Kingdom of
_Assyria_ was advanced on this side _Tigris_: for he was a great warrior,
and seems to have conquered _Haran_, and _Carchemish_, and _Reseph_, and
_Calneh_, and _Thelasar_, and might found or enlarge the city of _Babylon_,
and build the old palace.

_Herodotus_ tells us, that one of the gates of _Babylon_ was [356] called
the gate of _Semiramis_, and than she adorned the walls of the city, and
the Temple of _Belus_, and that she [357] was five Generations older than
_Nitocris_ the mother of _Labynitus_, or _Nabonnedus_, the last King of
_Babylon_; and therefore she flourished four Generations, or about 134
years, before _Nebuchadnezzar_ , and by consequence in the Reign of
_Tiglath-pileser_ the successor of _Pul_: and the followers of _Ctesias_
tell us, that she built _Babylon_, and was the widow of the son and
successor of _Belus_, the founder of the _Assyrian_ Empire; that is, the
widow of one of the sons of _Pul_: but [358] _Berosus_ a _Chaldæan_ blames
the _Greeks_ for ascribing the building of _Babylon_ to _Semiramis_; and
other authors ascribe the building of this city to _Belus_ himself, that is
to _Pul_; so _Curtius_ [359] tells us; _Semiramis Babylonem condiderat, vel
ut plerique credidere Belus, cujus regia ostenditur_: and _Abydenus_, who
had his history from the ancient monuments of the _Chaldæans_, writes,
[360] Λεγεται Βηλον Βαβυλωνα τειχει περιβαλειν· τωι χρονωι δε τωι
ικνευμενωι αφανισθηναι. τειχισαι δε αυθις Ναβουχοδονοσορον, το μεχρι της
Μακεδονιων αρχης διαμειναν εον χαλκοπυλον. _'Tis reported that _Belus_
compassed _Babylon_ with a wall, which in time was abolished: and that
_Nebuchadnezzar_ afterwards built a new wall with brazen gates, which stood
'till the time of the _Macedonian_ Empire_: and so _Dorotheas_ [361] an
ancient Poet of _Sidon_;

  Αρχαιη Βαβυλων, Τυριου Βηλοιο πολισμα.
  _The ancient city _Babylon_ built by the _Tyrian Belus__;

That is, by the _Syrian_ or _Assyrian_ _Belus_; the words _Tyrian_,
_Syrian_, and _Assyrian_, being anciently used promiscuously for one
another: _Herennius_ [362] tells us, that it was built by the son of
_Belus_; and this son might be _Nabonassar_. After the conquest of
_Calneh_, _Thelasar_, and _Sippare_, _Belus_ might seize _Chaldæa_, and
begin to build _Babylon_, and leave it to his younger son: for all the
Kings of _Babylon_ in the Canon of _Ptolemy_ are called _Assyrians_, and
_Nabonassar_ is the first of them: and _Nebuchadnezzar_ [363] reckoned
himself descended from _Belus_, that is, from the _Assyrian_ _Pul_: and the
building of _Babylon_ is ascribed to the _Assyrians_ by [364] _Isaiah_:
_Behold_, saith he, _the land of the _Chaldeans_: This people was not 'till
the _Assyrian_ founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness, _[that is,
for the _Arabians_.]_ They set up the towers thereof, they raised up the
palaces thereof_. From all this it seems therefore that _Pul_ founded the
walls and the palaces of _Babylon_, and left the city with the province of
_Chaldæa_ to his younger son _Nabonassar_; and that _Nabonassar_ finished
what his father began, and erected the Temple of _Jupiter Belus_ to his
father: and that _Semiramis_ lived in those days, and was the Queen of
_Nabonassar_, because one of the gates of _Babylon_ was called the gate of
_Semiramis_, as _Herodotus_ affirms: but whether she continued to Reign
there after her husband's death may be doubted.

_Pul_ therefore was succeeded at _Nineveh_ by his elder son
_Tiglath-pileser_, at the same time that he left _Babylon_ to his younger
son _Nabonassar_. _Tiglath-pileser_, the second King of _Assyria_, warred
in _Phœnicia_, and captivated _Galilee_ with the two Tribes and an half, in
the days of _Pekah_ King of _Israel_, and placed them in _Halah_, and
_Habor_, and _Hara_, and at the river _Gozan_, places lying on the western
borders of _Media_, between _Assyria_ and the _Caspian_ sea, 2 _King._ xv.
29, &: 1 _Chron._ v. 26. and about the fifth or sixth year of _Nabonassar_,
he came to the assistance of the King of _Judah_ against the Kings of
_Israel_ and _Syria_, and overthrew the Kingdom of _Syria_, which had been
seated at _Damascus_ ever since the days of King _David_, and carried away
the _Syrians_ to _Kir_ in _Media_, as _Amos_ had prophesied, and placed
other nations in the regions of _Damascus_, 2 _King._ xv. 37, & xvi. 5, 9.
_Amos_ i. 5. _Joseph. Antiq._ l. 9. c. 13. whence it seems that the _Medes_
were conquered before, and that the Empire of the _Assyrians_ was now grown
great: for _the God of _Israel_ stirred up the spirit of _Pul_ King of
_Assyria_, and the spirit of _Tiglath-pileser_ King of _Assyria__ to make
war, 1 _Chron._ v. 26.

_Shalmaneser_ or _Salmanasser_, called _Enemessar_ by _Tobit_, invaded
[365] all _Phœnicia_, took the city of _Samaria_, and captivated _Israel_,
and placed them in _Chalach_ and _Chabor_, by the river _Gozan_, and in the
cities of the _Medes_; and _Hosea_ [366] seems to say that he took
_Arbela_: and his successor _Sennacherib_ said that his fathers had
conquered also _Gozan_, and _Haran_ or _Carrhæ_, and _Reseph_ or _Resen_,
and the children of _Eden_, and _Arpad_ or the _Aradii_, 2 _King._ xix. 12.

_Sennacherib_ the son of _Shalmaneser_ in the 14th year of _Hezekiah_
invaded _Phœnicia_, and took several cities of _Judah_, and attempted
_Egypt_; and _Sethon_ or _Sevechus_ King of _Egypt_ and _Tirhakah_ King of
_Ethiopia_ coming against him, he lost in one night 185000 men, as some say
by a plague, or perhaps by lightning, or a fiery wind which blows sometimes
in the neighbouring deserts, or rather by being surprised by _Sethon_ and
_Tirhakah_: for the _Egyptians_ in memory of this action erected a statue
to _Sethon_, holding in his hand a mouse, the _Egyptian_ symbol of
destruction. Upon this defeat _Sennacherib_ returned in haste to _Nineveh_,
and [367] his Kingdom became troubled, so that _Tobit_ could not go into
_Media_, the _Medes_ I think at this time revolting: and he was soon after
slain by two of his sons who fled into _Armenia_, and his son _Asserhadon_
succeeded him. At that time did _Merodach Baladan_ or _Mardocempad_ King of
_Babylon_ send an embassy to _Hezekiah_ King of _Judah_.

_Asserhadon_, [368] called _Sarchedon_ by _Tobit_, _Asordan_ by the LXX,
and _Assaradin_ in _Ptolomy_'s Canon, began his Reign at _Nineveh_, in the
year of _Nabonassar_ 42; and in the year 68 extended it over _Babylon_:
then he carried the remainder of the _Samaritans_ into captivity, and
peopled _Samaria_ with captives brought from several parts of his Kingdom,
the _Dinaites_, the _Apharsachites_, the _Tarpelites_, the _Apharsites_,
the _Archevites_, the _Babylonians_, the _Susanchites_, the _Dehavites_,
the _Elamites_, _Ezra_ iv. 2, 9. and therefore he Reigned over all these
nations. _Pekah_ and _Rezin_ Kings of _Samaria_ and _Damascus_, invaded
_Judæa_ in the first year of _Ahaz_, and within 65 years after, that is in
the 21st year of _Manasseh_, _Anno Nabonass._ 69, _Samaria_ by this
captivity ceased to be a people, _Isa._ vii. 8. Then _Asserhadon_ invaded
_Judæa_, took _Azoth_, carried _Manasseh_ captive to _Babylon_, and [369]
captivated also _Egypt_, _Thebais_, and _Ethiopia_ above _Thebais_: and by
this war he seems to have put an end to the Reign of the _Ethiopians_ over
_Egypt_, in the year of _Nabonassar_ 77 or 78.

In the Reign of _Sennacherib_ and _Asserhadon_, the _Assyrian_ Empire seems
arrived at its greatness, being united under one Monarch, and containing
_Assyria_, _Media_, _Apolloniatis_, _Susiana_, _Chaldæa_, _Mesopotamia_,
_Cilicia_, _Syria_, _Phœnicia_, _Egypt_, _Ethiopia_, and part of _Arabia_,
and reaching eastward into _Elymais_, and _Parætacene_, a province of the
_Medes_: and if _Chalach_ and _Chabor_ be _Colchis_ and _Iberia_, as some
think, and as may seem probable from the circumcision used by those nations
'till the days of _Herodotus_, we are also to add these two Provinces, with
the two _Armenia's_, _Pontus_ and _Cappadocia_, as far as to the river
_Halys_: for [370] _Herodotus_ tells us, that the people of _Cappadocia_ as
far as to that river were called _Syrians_ by the _Greeks_, both before and
after the days or _Cyrus_, and that the _Assyrians_ were also called
_Syrians_ by the _Greeks_.

Yet the _Medes_ revolted from the _Assyrians_ in the latter end of the
Reign of _Sennacherib_, I think upon the slaughter of his army near _Egypt_
and his flight to _Nineveh_: for at that time the estate of _Sennacherib_
was troubled, so that _Tobit_ could not go into _Media_ as he had done
before, _Tobit_ i. 15. and some time after, _Tobit_ advised his son to go
into _Media_ where he might expect peace, while _Nineveh_, according to the
prophesy of _Jonah_, should be destroyed. _Ctesias_ wrote that _Arbaces_ a
_Mede_ being admitted to see _Sardanapalus_ in his palace, and observing
his voluptuous life amongst women, revolted with the _Medes_, and in
conjunction with _Belesis_ a _Babylonian_ overcame him, and caused him to
set fire to his palace and burn himself: but he is contradicted by other
authors of better credit; for _Duris_ and [371] many others wrote that
_Arbaces_ upon being admitted into the palace of _Sardanapalus_, and seeing
his effeminate life, slew himself; and _Cleitarchus_, that _Sardanapalus_
died of old age, after he had lost his dominion over _Syria_: he lost it by
the revolt of the western nations; and _Herodotus_ [372] tells us, that the
_Medes_ revolted first, and defended their liberty by force of arms against
the _Assyrians_, without conquering them; and at their first revolting had
no King, but after some time set up _Dejoces_ over them, and built
_Ecbatane_ for his residence; and that _Dejoces_ Reigned only over _Media_,
and had a peaceable Reign of 54 years, but his son and successor
_Phraortes_ made war upon his neighbours, and conquered _Persia_; and that
the _Syrians_ also, and other western nations, at length revolted from the
_Assyrians_, being encouraged thereunto by the example of the _Medes_; and
that after the revolt of the western nations, _Phraortes_ invaded the
_Assyrians_, but was slain by them in that war, after he had Reigned twenty
and two years. He was succeeded by _Astyages_.

Now _Asserhadon_ seems to be the _Sardanapalus_ who died of old age after
the revolt of _Syria_, the name _Sardanapalus_ being derived from
_Asserhadon-Pul_. _Sardanapalus_ was the [373] son of _Anacyndaraxis_,
_Cyndaraxis_, or _Anabaxaris_, King of _Assyria_; and this name seems to
have been corruptly written for _Sennacherib_ the father of _Asserhadon_.
_Sardanapalus_ built _Tarsus_ and _Anchiale_ in one day, and therefore
Reigned over _Cilicia_, before the revolt of the western nations: and if he
be the same King with _Asserhadon_, he was succeeded by _Saosduchinus_ in
the year of _Nabonassar_ 81; and by this revolution _Manasseh_ was set at
liberty to return home and fortify _Jerusalem_: and the _Egyptians_ also,
after the _Assyrians_ had harrassed _Egypt_ and _Ethiopia_ three years,
_Isa._ xx. 3, 4. were set at liberty, and continued under twelve
contemporary Kings of their own nation, as above. The _Assyrians_ invaded
and conquered the _Egyptians_ the first of the three years, and Reigned
over them two years more: and these two years are the interregnum which
_Africanus_, from _Manetho_, places next before the twelve Kings. The
_Scythians_ of _Touran_ or _Turquestan_ beyond the river _Oxus_ began in
those days to infest _Persia_, and by one of their inroads might give
occasion to the revolt of the western nations.

In the year of _Nabonassar_ 101, _Saosduchinus_, after a Reign of twenty
years, was succeeded at _Babylon_ by _Chyniladon_, and I think at _Nineveh_
also, for I take _Chyniladon_ to be that _Nabuchodonosor_ who is mentioned
in the book of _Judith_; for the history of that King suits best with these
times: for there it is said that __Nabuchodonosor_ King of the _Assyrians_
who Reigned at _Nineveh_, that great city, in the twelfth year of his Reign
made war upon _Arphaxad_ King of the _Medes__, and was then left alone by a
defection of the auxiliary nations of _Cilicia_, _Damascus_, _Syria_,
_Phœnicia_, _Moab_, _Ammon_, and _Egypt_; and without their help routed the
army of the _Medes_, and slew _Arphaxad_: and _Arphaxad_ is there said to
have built _Ecbatane_ and therefore was either _Dejoces_, or his son
_Phraortes_, who might finish the city founded by his father: and
_Herodotus_ [374] tells the same story of a King of _Assyria_, who routed
the _Medes_, and slew their King _Phraortes_; and saith that in the time of
this war the _Assyrians_ were left alone by the defection of the auxiliary
nations, being otherwise in good condition: _Arphaxad_ was therefore the
_Phraortes_ of _Herodotus_, and by consequence was slain near the beginning
of the Reign of _Josiah_: for this war was made after _Phœnicia_, _Moab_,
_Ammon_, and _Egypt_ had been conquered and revolted, _Judith_ i. 7, 8, 9.
and by consequence after the Reign of _Asserhadon_ who conquered them: it
was made when the _Jews_ were newly returned from captivity, _and the
Vessels and Altar and Temple were sanctified after the profanation_,
_Judith_ iv. 3. that is soon after _Manasseh_ their King had been carried
captive to _Babylon_ by _Asserhadon_; and upon the death of that King, or
some other change in the _Assyrian_ Empire, had been released with the
_Jews_ from that captivity, and had repaired the Altar, and restored the
sacrifices and worship of the Temple, 2 _Chron._ xxxiii. 11, 16. In the
_Greek_ version of the book of _Judith_, chap. v. 18. it is said, that _the
Temple of God was cast to the ground_; but this is not said in _Jerom_'s
version; and in the _Greek_ version, chap. iv. 3, and chap. xvi. 20, it is
said, that _the vessels, and the altar, and the house were sanctified after
the prophanation_, and in both versions, chap. iv. 11, the Temple is
represented standing.

After this war _Nabuchodonosor_ King of _Assyria_, in the 13th year of his
Reign, according to the version of _Jerom_, sent his captain _Holofernes_
with a great army to avenge himself on all the west country; because they
had disobeyed his commandment: and _Holofernes_ went forth with an army of
12000 horse, and 120000 foot of _Assyrians_, _Medes_ and _Persians_, and
reduced _Cilicia_, _Mesopotamia_, and _Syria_, and _Damascus_, and part of
_Arabia_, and _Ammon_, and _Edom_, and _Madian_, and then came against
_Judæa_: and this was done when the government was in the hands of the
High-Priest and Antients of _Israel_, _Judith_ iv. 8. and vii. 23. and by
consequence not in the Reign of _Manasseh_ or _Amon_, but when _Josiah_ was
a child. In times of prosperity the children of _Israel_ were apt to go
after false Gods, and in times of affliction to repent and turn to the
Lord. So _Manasseh_ a very wicked King, being captivated by the
_Assyrians_, repented; and being released from captivity restored the
worship of the true God: So when we are told that _Josiah in the eighth
year of his Reign, while he was yet young, began to seek after the God of
_David_ his father, and in the twelfth year of his Reign began to purge
_Judah_ and _Jerusalem_ from Idolatry, and to destroy the High Places, and
Groves, and Altars and Images of Baalim_, 2 _Chron_. xxxiv. 3. we may
understand that these acts of religion were occasioned by impending
dangers, and escapes from danger. When _Holofernes_ came against the
western nations, and spoiled them, then were the _Jews_ terrified, and they
fortified _Judæa_, and _cryed unto God with great fervency, and humbled
themselves in sackcloth, and put ashes on their heads, and cried unto the
God of _Israel_ that he would not give their wives and their children and
cities for a prey, and the Temple for a profanation: and the High-priest,
and all the Priests put on sackcloth and ashes, and offered daily burnt
offerings with vows and free gifts of the people_, _Judith_ iv. and then
began _Josiah_ to seek after the God of his father _David_: and after
_Judith_ had slain _Holofernes_, and the _Assyrians_ were fled, and the
_Jews_ who pursued them were returned to _Jerusalem_, _they worshipped the
Lord, and offered burnt offerings and gifts, and continued feasting before
the sanctuary for the space of three months_, _Judith_ xvi. 18, and then
did _Josiah_ purge _Judah_ and _Jerusalem_ from Idolatry. Whence it seems
to me that the eighth year of _Josiah_ fell in with the fourteenth or
fifteenth of _Nabuchodonosor_, and that the twelfth year of
_Nabuchodonosor_, in which _Phraortes_ was slain, was the fifth or sixth of
_Josiah_. _Phraortes_ Reigned 22 years according to _Herodotus_, and
therefore succeeded his father _Dejoces_ about the 40th year of _Manasseh_,
_Anno Nabonass._ 89, and was slain by the _Assyrians_, and succeeded by
_Astyages_, _Anno Nabonass._ 111. _Dejoces_ Reigned 53 years according to
_Herodotus_, and these years began in the 16th year of _Hezekiah_; which
makes it probable that the _Medes_ dated them from the time of their
revolt: and according to all this reckoning, the Reign of _Nabuchodonosor_
fell in with that of _Chyniladon_; which makes it probable that they were
but two names of one and the same King.

Soon after the death of _Phraortes_ [375] the _Scythians_ under _Madyes_ or
_Medus_ invaded _Media_, and beat the _Medes_ in battle, _Anno Nabonass._
113, and went thence towards _Egypt_, but were met in _Phœnicia_ by
_Psammitichus_ and bought off, and returning Reigned over a great part of
_Asia_: but in the end of about 28 years were expelled; many of their
Princes and commanders being slain in a feast by the _Medes_ under the
conduct of _Cyaxeres_, the successor of _Astyages_, just before the
destruction of _Nineveh_, and the rest being soon after forced to retire.

In the year of _Nabonassar_ 123, [376] _Nabopolassar_ the commander of the
forces of _Chyniladon_ the King of _Assyria_ in _Chaldæa_ revolted from
him, and became King of _Babylon_; and _Chyniladon_ was either then, or
soon after, succeeded at _Nineveh_ by the last King of _Assyria_, called
_Sarac_ by _Polyhistor_: and at length _Nebuchadnezzar_, the son of
_Nabopolassar_, married _Amyite_ the daughter of _Astyages_ and sister of
_Cyaxeres_; and by this marriage the two families having contracted
affinity, they conspired against the _Assyrians_; and _Nabopolasser_ being
now grown old, and _Astyages_ being dead, their sons _Nebuchadnezzar_ and
_Cyaxeres_ led the armies of the two nations against _Nineveh_, slew
_Sarac_, destroyed the city, and shared the Kingdom of the _Assyrians_.
This victory the _Jews_ refer to the _Chaldæans_; the _Greeks_ to the
_Medes_; _Tobit_, _Polyhistor_, _Josephus_, and _Ctesias_ to both. It gave
a beginning to the great successes of _Nebuchadnezzar_ and _Cyaxeres_, and
laid the foundation of the two collateral Empires of the _Babylonians_ and
_Medes_; these being branches of the _Assyrian_ Empire: and thence the time
of the fall of the _Assyrian_ Empire is determined, the conquerors being
then in their youth. In the Reign of _Josiah_, when _Zephaniah_ prophesied,
_Nineveh_ and the Kingdom of _Assyria_ were standing, and their fall was
predicted by that Prophet, _Zeph._ i. 1, and ii. 13. and in the end of his
Reign _Pharaoh Nechoh_ King of _Egypt_, the successor of _Psammitichus_,
went up against the King of _Assyria_ to the river _Euphrates_, to fight
against _Carchemish_ or _Circutium_, and in his way thither slew _Josiah_,
2 _Kings_ xxiii. 29. 2 _Chron._ xxxv. 20. and therefore the last King of
_Assyria_ was not yet slain. But in the third and fourth year of
_Jehoiakim_ the successor of _Josiah_, the two conquerors having taken
_Nineveh_ and finished their war in _Assyria_, prosecuted their conquests
westward, and leading their forces against the King of _Egypt_, as an
invader of their right of conquest, they beat him at _Carchemish_, and
[377] took from him whatever he had newly taken from the _Assyrians_: and
therefore we cannot err above a year or two, if we refer the destruction of
_Nineveh_, and fall of the _Assyrian_ Empire, to the second year of
_Jehoiakim_, _Anno Nabonass._ 140. The name of the last King _Sarac_ might
perhaps be contracted from _Sarchedon_, as this name was from _Asserhadon_,
_Asserhadon-Pul_, or _Sardanapalus_.

While the _Assyrians_ Reigned at _Nineveh_, _Persia_ was divided into
several Kingdoms; and amongst others there was a Kingdom of _Elam_, which
flourished in the days of _Hezekiah_, _Manasseh_, _Josiah_, and _Jehoiakim_
Kings of _Judah_, and fell in the days of _Zedekiah_, _Jer._ xxv. 25, and
xlix. 34, and _Ezek._ xxxii. 24. This Kingdom seems to have been potent,
and to have had wars with the King of _Touran_ or _Scythia_ beyond the
river _Oxus_ with various success, and at length to have been subdued by
the _Medes_ and _Babylonians_, or one of them. For while _Nebuchadnezzar_
warred in the west, _Cyaxeres_ recovered the _Assyrian_ provinces of
_Armenia_, _Pontus_, and _Cappadocia_, and then they went eastward against
the provinces of _Persia_ and _Parthia_. Whether the _Pischdadians_, whom
the _Persians_ reckon to have been their oldest Kings, were Kings of the
Kingdom of _Elam_, or of that of the _Assyrians_, and whether _Elam_ was
conquered by the _Assyrians_ at the same time with _Babylonia_ and
_Susiana_ in the Reign of _Asserhadon_, and soon after revolted, I leave to
be examined.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. IV.

_Of the two Contemporary Empires of the _Babylonians_ and _Medes_._

By the fall of the _Assyrian_ Empire the Kingdoms of the _Babylonians_ and
_Medes_ grew great and potent. The Reigns of the Kings of _Babylon_ are
stated in _Ptolemy's_ Canon: for understanding of which you are to note
that every King's Reign in that Canon began with the last _Thoth_ of his
predecessor's Reign, as I gather by comparing the Reigns of the _Roman_
Emperors in that Canon with their Reigns recorded in years, months, and
days, by other Authors: whence it appears from that Canon that _Asserhadon_
died in the year of _Nabonassar_ 81, _Saosduchinus_ his successor in the
year 101, _Chyniladon_ in the year 123, _Nabopolassar_ in the year 144, and
_Nebuchadnezzar_ in the year 187. All these Kings, and some others
mentioned in the Canon, Reigned successively over _Babylon_, and this last
King died in the 37th year of _Jechoniah_'s captivity, 2 _Kings_ xxv. 27.
and therefore _Jechoniah_ was captivated in the 150th year of _Nabonassar_.

This captivity was in the eighth year of _Nebuchadnezzar_'s Reign, 2
_Kings_ xxiv. 12. and eleventh of _Jehoiakim_'s: for the first year of
_Nebuchadnezzar_'s Reign was the fourth of _Jehoiakim_'s, _Jer._ xxv. i.
and _Jehoiakim_ Reigned eleven years before this captivity, 2 _Kings_
xxiii. 36. 2 _Chron._ xxxvi. 5, and _Jechoniah_ three months, ending with
the captivity; and the tenth year of _Jechoniah_'s captivity, was the
eighteenth year of _Nebuchadnezzar_'s Reign, _Jer._ xxxii. 1. and the
eleventh year of _Zedekiah_, in which _Jerusalem_ was taken, was the
nineteenth of _Nebuchadnezzar_, _Jer._ lii. 5, 12. and therefore
_Nebuchadnezzar_ began his Reign in the year of _Nabonassar_ 142, that is,
two years before the death of his father _Nabopolassar_, he being then made
King by his father; and _Jehoiakim_ succeeded his father _Josiah_ in the
year of _Nabonassar_ 139; and _Jerusalem_ was taken and the Temple burnt in
the year of _Nabonassar_ 160, about twenty years after the destruction of
_Nineveh_.

The Reign of _Darius Hystaspis_ over _Persia_, by the Canon and the consent
of all Chronologers, and by several Eclipses of the Moon, began in spring
in the year of _Nabonassar_ 227: and _in the fourth year of King _Darius_,
in the 4th day of the ninth month, which is the month _Chisleu_, when the
_Jews_ had sent unto the house of God, saying, should I weep in the fifth
month as I have done these so many years? the word of the Lord came unto
_Zechariah_, saying, speak to all the people of the Land, and to the
Priests, saying; when ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month
even those seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me?_ _Zech._ vii. Count
backwards those seventy years in which they fasted in the fifth month for
the burning of the Temple, and in the seventh for the death of _Gedaliah_;
and the burning of the Temple and death of _Gedaliah_, will fall upon the
fifth and seventh _Jewish_ months, in the year of _Nabonassar_ 160, as
above.

As the _Chaldæan_ Astronomers counted the Reigns of their Kings by the
years of _Nabonassar_, beginning with the month _Thoth_, so the _Jews_, as
their Authors tell us, counted the Reigns of theirs by the years of
_Moses_, beginning every year with the month _Nisan_: for if any King began
his Reign a few days before this month began, it was reckoned to him for a
whole year, and the beginning of this month was accounted the beginning of
the second year of his Reign; and according to this reckoning the first
year of _Jehojakim_ began with the month _Nisan_, _Anno Nabonass._ 139,
tho' his Reign might not really begin 'till five or six months after; and
the fourth year of _Jehoiakim_, and first of _Nebuchadnezzar_, according to
the reckoning of the _Jews_, began with the month _Nisan_, _Anno Nabonass._
142; and the first year of _Zedekiah_ and of _Jeconiah_'s captivity, and
ninth year of _Nebuchadnezzar_, began with the month _Nisan_, in the year
of _Nabonassar_ 150; and the tenth year of _Zedekiah_, and 18th of
_Nebuchadnezzar_, began with the month _Nisan_ in the year of _Nabonassar_
159. Now in the ninth year of _Zedekiah_, _Nebuchadnezzar_ invaded _Judæa_
and the cities thereof and in the tenth month of that year, and tenth day
of the month, he and his host besieged _Jerusalem_, 2 _Kings_ xxv. 1.
_Jer._ xxxiv. 1, xxxix. 1, and lii. 4. From this time to the tenth month in
the second year of _Darius_ are just seventy years, and accordingly, _upon
the 24th day of the eleventh month of the second year of _Darius_, the word
of the Lord came unto _Zechariah_,--and the Angel of the Lord said, Oh Lord
of Hosts, how long wilt thou not have mercy on _Jerusalem_, and on the
cities of _Judah_, against which thou hast had indignation, these
threescore and ten years_, _Zech._ i. 7, 12. So then the ninth year of
_Zedekiah_, in which this indignation against _Jerusalem_ and the cities of
_Judah_ began, commenced with the month _Nisan_ in the year of _Nabonassar_
158; and the eleventh year of _Zedekiah_, and nineteenth of
_Nebuchadnezzar_, in which the city was taken and the Temple burnt,
commenced with the month _Nisan_ in the year of _Nabonassar_ 160, as above.

By all these characters the years of _Jehoiakim_, _Zedekiah_, and
_Nebuchadnezzar_, seem to be sufficiently determined, and thereby the
Chronology of the _Jews_ in the Old Testament is connected with that of
later times: for between the death of _Solomon_ and the ninth year of
_Zedekiah_ wherein _Nebuchadnezzar_ invaded _Judæa_, and began the Siege of
_Jerusalem_, there were 390 years, as is manifest both by the prophesy of
_Ezekiel_, chap. iv, and by summing up the years of the Kings of _Judah_;
and from the ninth year of _Zedekiah_ inclusively to the vulgar _Æra_ of
_Christ_, there were 590 years: and both these numbers, with half the Reign
of _Solomon_, make up a thousand years.

In the [378] end of the Reign of _Josiah_, _Anno Nabonass._ 139, _Pharaoh
Nechoh_, the successor of _Psammitichus_, came with a great army out of
_Egypt_ against the King of _Assyria_, and being denied passage through
_Judæa_, beat the _Jews_ at _Megiddo_ or _Magdolus_ before _Egypt_, slew
_Josiah_ their King, marched to _Carchemish_ or _Circutium_, a town of
_Mesopotamia_ upon _Euphrates_, and took it, possest himself of the cities
of _Syria_, sent for _Jehoahaz_ the new King of _Judah_ to _Riblah_ or
_Antioch_, deposed him there, made _Jehojakim_ King in the room of
_Josiah_, and put the Kingdom of _Judah_ to tribute: but the King of
_Assyria_ being in the mean time besieged and subdued, and _Nineveh_
destroyed by _Assuerus_ King of the _Medes_, and _Nebuchadnezzar_ King of
_Babylon_, and the conquerors being thereby entitled to the countries
belonging to the King of _Assyria_, they led their victorious armies
against the King of _Egypt_ who had seized part of them. For
_Nebuchadnezzar_, assisted [379] by _Astibares_, that is, by _Astivares_,
_Assuerus_, _Acksweres_, _Axeres_, or _Cy-Axeres_, King of the _Medes_, in
the [380] third year of _Jehoiakim_, came with an army of _Babylonians_,
_Medes_, _Syrians_, _Moabites_ and _Ammonites_, to the number of 10000
chariots, and 180000 foot, and 120000 horse, and laid waste _Samaria_,
_Galilee_, _Scythopolis_, and the _Jews_ in _Galaaditis_, and besieged
_Jerusalem_, and took King _Jehoiakim_ alive, and [381] bound him in chains
for a time, and carried to _Babylon_ _Daniel_ and others of the people, and
part of what Gold and Silver and Brass they found in the Temple: and in
[382] the fourth year of _Jehoiakim_, which was the twentieth of
_Nabopolassar_, they routed the army of _Pharaoh Nechoh_ at _Carchemish_,
and by pursuing the war took from the King of _Egypt_ whatever pertained to
him from the river of _Egypt_ to the river of _Euphrates_. This King of
_Egypt_ is called by _Berosus_, [383] the _Satrapa_ of _Egypt_,
_Cœle-Syria_, and _Phœnicia_; and this victory over him put an end to his
Reign in _Cœle-Syria_ and _Phœnicia_, which he had newly invaded, and gave
a beginning to the Reign of _Nebuchadnezzar_ there: and by the conquests
over _Assyria_ and _Syria_ the small Kingdom of _Babylon_ was erected into
a potent Empire.

Whilst _Nebuchadnezzar_ was acting in _Syria_, [384] his father
_Nabopolassar_ died, having Reigned 21 years; and _Nebuchadnezzar_ upon the
news thereof, having ordered his affairs in _Syria_ returned to _Babylon_,
leaving the captives and his army with his servants to follow him: and from
henceforward he applied himself sometimes to war, conquering _Sittacene_,
_Susiana_, _Arabia_, _Edom_, _Egypt_, and some other countries; and
sometimes to peace, adorning the Temple of _Belus_ with the spoils that he
had taken; and the city of _Babylon_ with magnificent walls and gates, and
stately palaces and pensile gardens, as _Berosus_ relates; and amongst
other things he cut the new rivers _Naarmalcha_ and _Pallacopas_ above
_Babylon_ and built the city of _Teredon_.

_Judæa_ was now in servitude under the King of _Babylon_, being invaded and
subdued in the third and fourth years of _Jehoiakim_, _and _Jehoiakim_
served him three years, and then turned and rebelled_, 2 _King._ xxiv. 1.
While _Nebuchadnezzar_ and the army of the _Chaldæans_ continued in
_Syria_, _Jehojakim_ was under compulsion; after they returned to
_Babylon_, _Jehojakim_ continued in fidelity three years, that is, during
the 7th, 8th and 9th years of his Reign, and rebelled in the tenth:
whereupon in the return or end of the year, that is in spring, he sent
[385] and besieged _Jerusalem_, captivated _Jeconiah_ the son and successor
of _Jehoiakim_, spoiled the Temple, and carried away to _Babylon_ the
Princes, craftsmen, smiths, and all that were fit for war: and, when none
remained but the poorest of the people, made [386] _Zedekiah_ their King,
and bound him upon oath to serve the King of _Babylon_: this was in spring
in the end of the eleventh year of _Jehoiakim_, and beginning of the year
of _Nabonassar_ 150.

_Zedekiah_ notwithstanding his oath [387] revolted, and made a covenant
with the King of _Egypt_, and therefore _Nebuchadnezzar_ in the ninth year
of _Zedekiah_ [388] invaded _Judæa_ and the cities thereof, and in the
tenth _Jewish_ month of that year besieged _Jerusalem_ again, and in the
eleventh year of _Zedekiah_, in the 4th and 5th months, after a siege of
one year and an half, took and burnt the City and Temple.

_Nebuchadnezzar_ after he was made King by his father Reigned over
_Phœnicia_ and _Cœle-Syria_ 45 years, and [389] after the death of his
father 43 years, and [390] after the captivity of _Jeconiah_ 37; and then
was succeeded by his son _Evilmerodach_, called _Iluarodamus_ in
_Ptolemy_'s Canon. _Jerome_ [391] tells us, that _Evilmerodach_ Reigned
seven years in his father's life-time, while his father did eat grass with
oxen, and after his father's restoration was put in prison with _Jeconiah_
King of _Judah_ 'till the death of his father, and then succeeded in the
Throne. In the fifth year of _Jeconiah_'s captivity, _Belshazzar_ was next
in dignity to his father _Nebuchadnezzar_, and was designed to be his
successor, _Baruch_ i. 2, 10, 11, 12, 14, and therefore _Evilmerodach_ was
even then in disgrace. Upon his coming to the Throne [392] he brought his
friend and companion _Jeconiah_ out of prison on the 27th day of the
twelfth month; so that _Nebuchadnezzar_ died in the end of winter, _Anno
Nabonass._ 187.

_Evilmerodach_ Reigned two years after his father's death, and for his lust
and evil manners was slain by his sister's husband _Neriglissar_, or
_Nergalassar_, _Nabonass._ 189, according to the Canon.

_Neriglissar_, in the name of his young son _Labosordachus_, or
_Laboasserdach_, the grand-child of _Nebuchadnezzar_ by his daughter,
Reigned four years, according to the Canon and _Berosus_, including the
short Reign of _Laboasserdach_ alone: for _Laboasserdach_, according to
_Berosus_ and _Josephus_, Reigned nine months after the death of his
father, and then for his evil manners was slain in a feast, by the
conspiracy of his friends with _Nabonnedus_ a _Babylonian_, to whom by
consent they gave the Kingdom: but these nine months are not reckoned apart
in the Canon.

_Nabonnedus_ or _Nabonadius_, according to the Canon, began his Reign in
the year of _Nabonassar_ 193, Reigned seventeen years, and ended his Reign
in the year of _Nabonassar_ 210, being then vanquished and _Babylon_ taken
by _Cyrus_.

_Herodotus_ calls this last King of _Babylon_, _Labynitus_, and says that
he was the son of a former _Labynitus_, and of _Nitocris_ an eminent Queen
of _Babylon_: by the father he seems to understand that _Labynitus_, who,
as he tells us, was King of _Babylon_ when the great Eclipse of the Sun
predicted by _Thales_ put an end to the five years war between the _Medes_
and _Lydians_; and this was the great _Nebuchadnezzar_. _Daniel_ [393]
calls the last King of _Babylon_, _Belshazzar_, and saith that
_Nebuchadnezzar_ was his father: and _Josephus_ tells us, [394] that the
last King of _Babylon_ was called _Naboandel_ by the _Babylonians_, and
Reigned seventeen years; and therefore he is the same King of _Babylon_
with _Nabonnedus_ or _Labynitus_; and this is more agreeable to sacred writ
than to make _Nabonnedus_ a stranger to the royal line: for all _nations
were to serve _Nebuchadnezzar_ and his posterity, till the very time of his
land should come, and many nations should serve themselves of him_, _Jer._
xxvii. 7. _Belshazzar_ was born and lived in honour before the fifth year
of _Jeconiah_'s captivity, which was the eleventh year of
_Nebuchadnezzar_'s Reign; and therefore he was above 34 years old at the
death of _Evilmerodach_, and so could be no other King than _Nabonnedus_:
for _Laboasserdach_ the grandson of _Nebuchadnezzar_ was a child when he
Reigned.

_Herodotus_ [395] tells us, that there were two famous Queens of _Babylon_,
_Semiramis_ and _Nitocris_; and that the latter was more skilful: she
observing that the Kingdom of the _Medes_, having subdued many cities, and
among others _Nineveh_, was become great and potent, intercepted and
fortified the passages out of _Media_ into _Babylonia_; and the river which
before was straight, she made crooked with great windings, that it might be
more sedate and less apt to overflow: and on the side of the river above
_Babylon_, in imitation of the Lake of _Mœris_ in _Egypt_, she dug a Lake
every way forty miles broad, to receive the water of the river, and keep it
for watering the land. She built also a bridge over the river in the middle
of _Babylon_, turning the stream into the Lake 'till the bridge was built.
_Philostratus_ saith, [396] that she made a bridge under the river two
fathoms broad, meaning an arched vault over which the river flowed, and
under which they might walk cross the river: he calls her Μηδεια, a _Mede_.

_Berosus_ tells us, that _Nebuchadnezzar_ built a pensile garden upon
arches, because his wife was a _Mede_ and delighted in mountainous
prospects, such as abounded in _Media_, but were wanting in _Babylonia_:
she was _Amyite_ the daughter of _Astyages_, and sister of _Cyaxeres_,
Kings of the _Medes_. _Nebuchadnezzar_ married her upon a league between
the two families against the King of _Assyria_: but _Nitocris_ might be
another woman who in the Reign of her son _Labynitus_, a voluptuous and
vicious King, took care of his affairs, and for securing his Kingdom
against the _Medes_, did the works above mentioned. This is that Queen
mentioned in _Daniel_, chap. v. ver. 10.

_Josephus_ [397] relates out of the _Tyrian_ records, that in the Reign of
_Ithobalus_ King of _Tyre_, that city was besieged by _Nebuchadnezzar_
thirteen years together: in the end of that siege _Ithobalus_ their King
was slain, _Ezek._ xxviii. 8, 9, 10. and after him, according to the
_Tyrian_ records, Reigned _Baal_ ten years, _Ecnibalus_ and _Chelbes_ one
year, _Abbarus_ three months, _Mytgonus_ and _Gerastratus_ six years,
_Balatorus_ one year, _Merbalus_ four years, and _Iromus_ twenty years: and
in the fourteenth year of _Iromus_, say the _Tyrian_ records, the Reign of
_Cyrus_ began in _Babylonia_; therefore the siege of _Tyre_ began 48 years
and some months before the Reign of _Cyrus_ in _Babylonia_: it began when
_Jerusalem_ had been newly taken and burnt, with the Temple, _Ezek._ xxvi
and by consequence after the eleventh year of _Jeconiah_'s captivity, or
160th year of _Nabonassar_, and therefore the Reign of _Cyrus_ in
_Babylonia_ began after the year of _Nabonassar_ 208: it ended before the
eight and twentieth year of _Jeconiah_'s captivity, or 176th year of
_Nabonassar_, _Ezek._ xxix. 17. and therefore the Reign of _Cyrus_ in
_Babylonia_ began before the year of _Nabonassar_ 211. By this argument the
first year of _Cyrus_ in _Babylonia_ was one of the two intermediate years
209, 210. _Cyrus_ invaded _Babylonia_ in the year of _Nabonassar_ 209;
[398] _Babylon_ held out, and the next year was taken, _Jer._ li. 39, 57.
by diverting the river _Euphrates_, and entring the city through the
emptied channel, and by consequence after midsummer: for the river, by the
melting of the snow in _Armenia_, overflows yearly in the beginning of
summer, but in the heat of dimmer grows low. [399] _And that night was the
King of _Babylon_ slain, and _Darius_ the _Mede_, or King of the _Medes_,
took the Kingdom being about threescore and two years old_: so then
_Babylon_ was taken a month or two after the summer solstice, in the year
of _Nabonassar_ 210; as the Canon also represents.

The Kings of the _Medes_ before _Cyrus_ were _Dejoces_, _Phraortes_,
_Astyages_, _Cyaxeres_, or _Cyaxares_, and _Darius_: the three first
Reigned before the Kingdom grew great, the two last were great conquerors,
and erected the Empire; for _Æschylus_, who flourished in the Reigns of
_Darius Hystaspis_, and _Xerxes_, and died in the 76th Olympiad, introduces
_Darius_ thus complaining of those who persuaded his son _Xerxes_ to invade
_Greece_; [400]

  Τοιγαρ σφιν εργον εστιν εξειργασμενον
  Μεγιστον, αιειμνηστον ‛οιον ουδεπω,
  Το δ' αστυ Σουσων εξεκεινωσεν πεσον·
  Εξ ‛ουτε τιμην Ζευς αναξ τηνδ' ωπασεν
  Εν ανδρα πασης Ασιαδος μηλοτροφου
  Ταγειν, εχοντα σκηπτρον ευθυντηριον
  Μηδος γαρ ην ‛ο πρωτος ‛ηγεμων στρατου·
  Αλλος δ' εκεινου παις τοδ' εργον ηνυσε·
  Φρενες γαρ αυτου θυμον οιακοστροφουν.
  Τριτος δ' απ' αυτου Κυρος, ευδαιμων ανηρ, &c.

  _They have done a work_
  _The greatest, and most memorable, such as never happen'd,_
  _For it has emptied the falling _Sufa_:_
  _From the time that King_ Jupiter _granted this honour,_
  _That one man should Reign over all fruitful _Asia_,_
  _Having the imperial Scepter._
  _For he that first led the Army was a _Mede_;_
  _The next, who was his son, finisht the work,_
  _For prudence directed his soul;_
  _The third was _Cyrus_, a happy man_, &c.

The Poet here attributes the founding of the _Medo-Persian_ Empire to the
two immediate predecessors of _Cyrus_, the first of which was a _Mede_, and
the second was his son: the second was _Darius_ the _Mede_, the immediate
predecessor of _Cyrus_, according to _Daniel_; and therefore the first was
the father of _Darius_, that is, _Achsuerus_, _Assuerus_, _Oxyares_,
_Axeres_, Prince _Axeres_, or _Cy-Axeres_, the word _Cy_ signifying a
Prince: for _Daniel_ tells us, that _Darius_ was the son of _Achsuerus_, or
_Ahasuerus_, as the _Masoretes_ erroneously call him, of the seed of the
_Medes_, that is, of the seed royal: this is that _Assuerus_ who together
with _Nebuchadnezzar_ took and destroyed _Nineveh_, according to _Tobit_:
which action is by the _Greeks_ ascribed to _Cyaxeres_, and by _Eupolemus_
to _Astibares_, a name perhaps corruptly written for _Assuerus_. By this
victory over the _Assyrians_, and subversion of their Empire seated at
_Nineveh_, and the ensuing conquests of _Armenia_, _Cappadocia_ and
_Persia_, he began to extend the Reign of one man over all _Asia_; and his
son _Darius_ the _Mede_, by conquering the Kingdoms of _Lydia_ and
_Babylon_, finished the work: and the third King was _Cyrus_, a happy man
for his great successes under and against _Darius_, and large and peaceable
dominion in his own Reign.

_Cyrus_ lived seventy years, according to _Cicero_, and Reigned nine years
over _Babylon_, according to _Ptolemy_'s Canon, and therefore was 61 years
old at the taking of _Babylon_; at which time _Darius_ the _Mede_ was 62
years old, according to _Daniel_: and therefore _Darius_ was two
Generations younger than _Astyages_, the grandfather of _Cyrus_: for
_Astyages_, according to both [401] _Herodotus_ and _Xenophon_, gave his
daughter _Mandane_ to _Cambyses_ a Prince of _Persia_, and by them became
the grandfather of _Cyrus_; and _Cyaxeres_ was the son of _Astyages_,
according [402] to _Xenophon_, and gave his Daughter to _Cyrus_. This
daughter, [403] saith _Xenophon_, was reported to be very handsome, and
used to play with _Cyrus_ when they were both children, and to say that she
would marry him: and therefore they were much of the same age. _Xenophon_
saith that _Cyrus_ married her after the taking of _Babylon_; but she was
then an old woman: it's more probable that he married her while she was
young and handsome, and he a young man; and that because he was the
brother-in-law of _Darius_ the King, he led the armies of the Kingdom until
he revolted: so then _Astyages_, _Cyaxeres_ and _Darius_ Reigned
successively over the _Medes_; and _Cyrus_ was the grandson of _Astyages_,
and married the sister of _Darius_, and succeeded him in the Throne.

_Herodotus_ therefore [404] hath inverted the order of the Kings _Astyages_
and _Cyaxeres_, making _Cyaxeres_ to be the son and successor of
_Phraortes_, and the father and predecessor of _Astyages_ the father of
_Mandane_, and grandfather of _Cyrus_, and telling us, that this _Astyages_
married _Ariene_ the daughter of _Alyattes_ King of _Lydia_, and was at
length taken prisoner and deprived of his dominion by _Cyrus_: and
_Pausanias_ hath copied after _Herodotus_, in telling us that _Astyages_
the son of _Cyaxeres_ Reigned in _Media_ in the days of _Alyattes_ King of
_Lydia_. _Cyaxeres_ had a son who married _Ariene_ the daughter of
_Alyattes_; but this son was not the father of _Mandane_, and grandfather
of _Cyrus_, but of the same age with _Cyrus_: and his true name is
preserved in the name of the _Darics_, which upon the conquest of _Crœsus_
by the conduct of his General _Cyrus_, he coyned out of the gold and silver
of the conquered _Lydians_: his name was therefore _Darius_, as he is
called by _Daniel_; for _Daniel_ tells us, that this _Darius_ was a _Mede_,
and that his father's name was _Assuerus_, that is _Axeres_ or _Cyaxeres_,
as above: considering therefore that _Cyaxeres_ Reigned long, and that no
author mentions more Kings of _Media_ than one called _Astyages_, and that
_Æschylus_ who lived in those days knew but of two great Monarchs of
_Media_ and _Persia_, the father and the son, older than _Cyrus_; it seems
to me that _Astyages_, the father of _Mandane_ and grandfather of _Cyrus_,
was the father and predecessor of _Cyaxeres_; and that the son and
successor of _Cyaxeres_ was called _Darius_. _Cyaxeres_, [405] according to
_Herodotus_, Reigned 40 years, and his successor 35, and _Cyrus_, according
to _Xenophon_, seven: _Cyrus_ died _Anno Nabonass._ 219, according to the
Canon, and therefore _Cyaxeres_ died _Anno Nabonass._ 177, and began his
Reign _Anno Nabonass._ 137, and his father _Astyages_ Reigned 26 years,
beginning his Reign at the death of _Phraortes_, who was slain by the
_Assyrians_, _Anno Nabonass._ 111, as above.

Of all the Kings of the _Medes_, _Cyaxeres_ was greatest warrior.
_Herodotus_ [406] saith that he was much more valiant than his ancestors,
and that he was the first who divided the Kingdom into provinces, and
reduced the irregular and undisciplined forces of the _Medes_ into
discipline and order: and therefore by the testimony of _Herodotus_ he was
that King of the _Medes_ whom _Æschylus_ makes the first conqueror and
founder of the Empire; for _Herodotus_ represents him and his son to have
been the two immediate predecessors of _Cyrus_, erring only in the name of
the son. _Astyages_ did nothing glorious: in the beginning of his Reign a
great body of _Scythians_ commanded by _Madyes_, [407] invaded _Media_ and
_Parthia_, as above, and Reigned there about 28 years; but at length his
son _Cyaxeres_ circumvented and slew them in a feast, and made the rest fly
to their brethren in _Parthia_; and immediately after, in conjunction with
_Nebuchadnezzar_, invaded and subverted the Kingdom of _Assyria_, and
destroyed _Nineveh_.

In the fourth year of _Jehoiakim_, which the _Jews_ reckon to be the first
of _Nebuchadnezzar_, dating his Reign from his being made King by his
father, or from the month _Nisan_ preceding, when the victors had newly
shared the Empire of the _Assyrians_, and in prosecuting their victory were
invading _Syria_ and _Phœnicia_, and were ready to invade the nations round
about; God [408] threatned that _he would take all the families of the
North, _that is, the armies of the _Medes_,_ and _Nebuchadnezzar_ the King
of _Babylon_, and bring them against _Judæa_ and against the nations round
about, and utterly destroy those nations, and make them an astonishment and
lasting desolations, and cause them all to drink the wine-cup of his fury_;
and in particular, he names _the Kings of _Judah_ and _Egypt_, and those of
_Edom_, and _Moab_, and _Ammon_, and _Tyre_, and _Zidon_, and the Isles of
the Sea, and _Arabia_, and _Zimri_, and all the Kings of _Elam_, and all
the Kings of the _Medes_, and all the Kings of the North, and the King of
_Sesac_; and that after seventy years, he would also punish the King of
_Babylon__. Here, in numbering the nations which should suffer, he omits
the _Assyrians_ as fallen already, and names the Kings of _Elam_ or
_Persia_, and _Sesac_ or _Susa_, as distinct from those of the _Medes_ and
_Babylonians_; and therefore the _Persians_ were not yet subdued by the
_Medes_, nor the King of _Susa_ by the _Chaldæans_; and as by the
punishment of the King of _Babylon_ he means the conquest of _Babylon_ by
the _Medes_; so by the punishment of the _Medes_ he seems to mean the
conquest of the _Medes_ by _Cyrus_.

After this, in the beginning of the Reign of _Zedekiah_, that is, in the
ninth year of _Nebuchadnezzar,_ God threatned that _he would give the
Kingdoms of _Edom_, _Moab_, and _Ammon_, and _Tyre_ and _Zidon_, into the
hand of _Nebuchadnezzar_ King of _Babylon_, and that all the nations should
serve him, and his son, and his son's son until the very time of his land
should come, and many nations and great Kings should serve themselves of
him_, Jer. xxvii. And at the same time God thus predicted the approaching
conquest of the _Persians_ by the _Medes_ and their confederates: _Behold_,
saith he, _I will break the bow of _Elam_, the chief of their might: and
upon _Elam_ will I bring the four winds from the four quarters of heaven,
and will scatter them towards all those winds, and there shall be no nation
whither the outcasts of _Elam_ shall not come: for I will cause _Elam_ to
be dismayed before their enemies, and before them that seek their life; and
I will bring evil upon them, even my fierce anger, saith the Lord; and I
will send the sword after them 'till I have consumed them; and I will set
my throne in _Elam_, and will destroy from thence the King and the Princes,
saith the Lord: but it shall come to pass in the latter days, _viz. in the
Reign of _Cyrus_,_ that I will bring again the captivity of _Elam_, saith
the Lord._ Jer. xlix. 35, _&c._ The _Persians_ were therefore hitherto a
free nation under their own King, but soon after this were invaded,
subdued, captivated, and dispersed into the nations round about, and
continued in servitude until the Reign of _Cyrus_: and since the _Medes_
and _Chaldæans_ did not conquer the _Persians_ 'till after the ninth year
of _Nebuchadnezzar_, it gives us occasion to enquire what that active
warrior _Cyaxeres_ was doing next after the taking of _Nineveh_.

When _Cyaxeres_ expelled the _Scythians_, [409] some of them made their
peace with him, and staid in _Media_, and presented to him daily some of
the venison which they took in hunting: but happening one day to catch
nothing, _Cyaxeres_ in a passion treated them with opprobrious language:
this they resented, and soon after killed one of the children of the
_Medes_, dressed it like venison, and presented it to _Cyaxeres_, and then
fled to _Alyattes_ King of _Lydia_; whence followed a war of five years
between the two Kings _Cyaxeres_ and _Alyattes_: and thence I gather that
the Kingdoms of the _Medes_ and _Lydians_ were now contiguous, and by
consequence that _Cyaxeres_, soon after the conquest of _Nineveh_, seized
the regions belonging to the _Assyrians_, as far as to the river _Halys_.
In the sixth year of this war, in the midst of a battel between the two
Kings, there was a total Eclipse of the Sun, predicted by _Thales_; [410]
and this Eclipse fell upon the 28th of _May_, _Anno Nabonass._ 163, forty
and seven years before the taking of _Babylon_, and put an end to the
battel: and thereupon the two Kings made peace by the mediation of
_Nebuchadnezzar_ King of _Babylon_, and _Syennesis_ King of _Cilicia_; and
the peace was ratified by a marriage, between _Darius_ the son of
_Cyaxeres_ and _Ariene_ the daughter of _Alyattes_: _Darius_ was therefore
fifteen or sixteen years old at the time of this marriage; for he was 62
years old at the taking of _Babylon_.

In the eleventh year of _Zedekiah's_ Reign, the year in which
_Nebuchadnezzar_ took _Jerusalem_ and destroyed the Temple, _Ezekiel_
comparing the Kingdoms of the East to trees in the garden of _Eden_, thus
mentions their being conquered by the Kings of the _Medes_ and _Chaldæans:
Behold_, saith he, _the_ Assyrian _was a Cedar in_ Lebanon _with fair
branches,--his height was exalted above all the trees of the field,--and
under his shadow dwelt all great nations,--not any tree in the garden of
God was like unto him in his beauty:--but I have delivered him into the
hand of the mighty one of the heathen,--I made the nations to shake at the
sound of his fall, when I cast him down to the grave with them that descend
into the pit: and all the trees of _Eden_, the choice and best of
_Lebanon_, all that drink water, shall be comforted in the nether parts of
the earth: they also went down into the grave with him, unto them that be
slain with the sword, and they that were his arm, that dwelt under his
shadow in the midst of the heathen,_ Ezek. xxxi.

The next year _Ezekiel_, in another prophesy, thus enumerates the principal
nations who had been subdued and slaughtered by the conquering sword of
_Cyaxeres_ and _Nebuchadnezzar_. __Asthur_ is there and all her company,
_viz. in _Hades_ or the lower parts of the earth, where the dead bodies lay
buried_, his graves are about him; all of them slain, fallen by the sword,
which caused their terrour in the land of the living. There is _Elam_, and
all her multitude round about her grave, all of them slain, fallen by the
sword, which are gone down uncircumcised into the nether parts of the
earth, which caused their terrour in the land of the living: yet have they
born their shame with them that go down into the pit.--There is _Meshech_,
_Tubal_, and all her multitude [411]; her graves are round about him: all
of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, though they caused their terrour
in the land of the living.--There is _Edom_, her Kings, and all her
Princes, which with their might are laid by them that were slain by the
sword.--There be the Princes of the North all of them, and all the
_Zidonians_, which with their terrour are gone down with the slain_, Ezek.
xxxii. Here by the Princes of the North I understand those on the north of
_Judæa_, and chiefly the Princes of _Armenia_ and _Cappadocia_, who fell in
the wars which _Cyaxeres_ made in reducing those countries after the taking
of _Nineveh_. _Elam_ or _Persia_ was conquered by the _Medes_, and
_Susiana_ by the _Babylonians_, after the ninth, and before the nineteenth
year of _Nebuchadnezzar_: and therefore we cannot err much if we place
these conquests in the twelfth or fourteenth year of _Nebuchadnezzar_: in
the nineteenth, twentieth, and one and twentieth year of this King, he
invaded and [412] conquered _Judæa_, _Moab_, _Ammon_, _Edom_, the
_Philistims_ and _Zidon_; and [413] the next year he besieged _Tyre_, and
after a siege of thirteen years he took it, in the 35th year of his Reign;
and then he [414] invaded and conquered _Egypt_, _Ethiopia_ and _Libya_;
and about eighteen or twenty years after the death of this King, _Darius_
the _Mede_ conquered the Kingdom of _Sardes_; and after five or six years
more he invaded and conquered the Empire of _Babylon_: and thereby finished
the work of propagating the _Medo-Persian_ Monarchy over all _Asia_, as
_Æschylus_ represents.

Now this is that _Darius_ who coined a great number of pieces of pure gold
called _Darics_, or _Stateres Darici:_ for _Suidas_, _Harpocration_, and
the Scholiast of _Aristophanes_> [415] tell us, that these were coined not
by the father of _Xerxes_, but by an earlier _Darius_, by _Darius_ the
first, by the first King of the _Medes_ and _Persians_ who coined gold
money. They were stamped on one side with the effigies of an Archer, who
was crowned with a spiked crown, had a bow in his left hand, and an arrow
in his right, and was cloathed with a long robe; I have seen one of them in
gold, and another in silver: they were of the same weight and value with
the _Attic Stater_ or piece of gold money weighing two _Attic_ drachms.
_Darius_ seems to have learnt the art and use of money from the conquered
Kingdom of the _Lydians_, and to have recoined their gold: for the _Medes_,
before they conquered the _Lydians_, had no money. _Herodotus_ [416] tells
us, that _when_ Crœsus _was preparing to invade_ Cyrus, _a certain _Lydian_
called _Sandanis_ advised him, that he was preparing an expedition against
a nation who were cloathed with leathern breeches, who eat not such
victuals as they would, but such as their barren country afforded; who
drank no wine, but water only, who eat no figs nor other good meat, who had
nothing to lose, but might get much from the _Lydians__: _for the
_Persians__, saith _Herodotus_, _before they conquered the _Lydians_, had
nothing rich or valuable_: and [417] _Isaiah_ tells us, that _the _Medes_
regarded not silver, nor delighted in gold_; but the _Lydians_ and
_Phrygians_ were exceeding rich, even to a proverb: _Midas & Crœsus_, saith
[418] _Pliny, infinitum possederant. Jam Cyrus devicta Asia_ [auri] _pondo
xxxiv millia invenerat, præter vasa aurea aurumque factum, & in eo folia ac
platanum vitemque. Qua victoria argenti quingenta millia talentorum
reportavit, & craterem Semiramidis cujus pondus quindecim talentorum
colligebat. Talentum autem Ægyptium pondo octoginta capere Varro tradit._
What the conqueror did with all this gold and silver appears by the
_Darics_. The _Lydians_, according to [419] _Herodotus_, were the first who
coined gold and silver, and _Crœsus_ coined gold monies in plenty, called
_Crœsei_; and it was not reasonable that the monies of the Kings of _Lydia_
should continue current after the overthrow of their Kingdom, and therefore
_Darius_ recoined it with his own effigies, but without altering the
current weight and value: he Reigned then from before the conquest of
_Sardes_ 'till after the conquest of _Babylon_.

And since the cup of _Semiramis_ was preserved 'till the conquest of
_Crœsus_ by _Darius_, it is not probable that she could be older than is
represented by _Herodotus_.

This conquest of the Kingdom of _Lydia_ put the _Greeks_ into fear of the
_Medes_: for _Theognis_, who lived at _Megara_ in the very times of these
wars, writes thus, [420]

  Πινωμεν, χαριεντα μετ' αλληλοισι λεγοντες,
    Μηδεν τον Μηδων δειδιοτες πολεμον.

  _Let us drink, talking pleasant things with one another,_
    _Not fearing the war of the _Medes_._

And again, [421]

  Αυτος δε στρατον ‛υβριστην Μηδων απερυκε
    Τησδε πολευς, ‛ινα σοι λαοι εν ευφροσυνηι
  Ηρος επερχομενου κλειτας πεμπωσ' ‛εκατομβας,
    Τερπομενοι κιθαρη και ερατηι θαλιηι,
  Παιανωντε χοροις, ιαχωσι τε, σον περι βωμον.
    Η γαρ εγωγε δεδοικ', αφραδιην εσορων
  Και στασιν ‛Ελληνων λαοφθορον· αλλα συ Φοιβε,
    ‛Ιλαος ‛ημετερην τηνδε φυλασσε πολιν.

  _Thou _Apollo_ drive away the injurious army of the _Medes__
    _From this city, that the people may with joy_
  _Send thee choice hecatombs in the spring,_
    _Delighted with the harp and chearful feasting,_
  _And chorus's of _Pœans_ and acclamations about thy altar_.
    _For truly I am afraid, beholding the folly_
  _And sedition of the _Greeks_, which corrupts the people: but thou
      _Apollo_,_
    _Being propitious, keep this our city._

The Poet tells us further that discord had destroyed _Magnesia_,
_Colophon_, and _Smyrna_, cities of _Ionia_ and _Phrygia_, and would
destroy the _Greeks_; which is as much as to say that the _Medes_ had then
conquered those cities.

The _Medes_ therefore Reigned 'till the taking of _Sardes_: and further,
according to _Xenophon_ and the Scriptures, they Reigned 'till the taking
of _Babylon_: for _Xenophon_ [422] tells us, that after the taking of
_Babylon_, _Cyrus_ went to the King of the _Medes_ at _Ecbatane_ and
succeeded him in the Kingdom: and _Jerom_, [423] _that _Babylon_ was taken
by _Darius_ King of the _Medes_ and his kinsman _Cyrus__: and the
Scriptures tell us, that _Babylon_ was destroyed by _a nation out of the
north_, _Jerem_. l. 3, 9, 41. by _the Kingdoms of _Ararat Minni, or
_Armenia__, and _Ashchenez, or _Phrygia minor___, _Jer_. li. 27. by the
_Medes_, _Isa._ xiii. 17, 19. _by the Kings of the _Medes_ and the captains
and rulers thereof, and all the land of his dominion_, _Jer_. li. 11, 28.
The Kingdom of _Babylon_ was _numbred and finished and broken and given to
the _Medes_ and _Persians__, _Dan._ v. 26. 28. first to the _Medes_ under
_Darius_, and then to the _Persians_ under _Cyrus_: for _Darius_ Reigned
over _Babylon_ like a conqueror, not observing the laws of the
_Babylonians_, but introducing the immutable laws of the conquering
nations, the _Medes_ and _Persians_, _Dan._ vi. 8, 12, 15; and the _Medes_
in his Reign are set before the _Persians_, _Dan._ ib. & v. 28, & viii. 20.
as the _Persians_ were afterwards in the Reign of _Cyrus_ and his
successors set before the _Medes_, _Esther_ i. 3, 14, 18, 19. _Dan._ x. 1,
20. and xi. 2. which shews that in the Reign of _Darius_ the _Medes_ were
uppermost.

You may know also by the great number of provinces in the Kingdom of
_Darius_, that he was King of the _Medes_ and _Persians_: for upon the
conquest of _Babylon_, he set over the whole Kingdom an hundred and twenty
Princes, _Dan._ vi. 1. and afterwards when _Cambyses_ and _Darius
Hystaspis_ had added some new territories, the whole contained but 127
provinces.

The extent of the _Babylonian_ Empire was much the same with that of
_Nineveh_ after the revolt of the _Medes_. _Berosus_ saith that
_Nebuchadnezzar_ held _Egypt_, _Syria_, _Phœnicia_ and _Arabia_: and
_Strabo_ adds _Arbela_ to the territories of _Babylon_; and saying that
_Babylon_ was anciently the metropolis of _Assyria_, he thus describes the
limits of this _Assyrian_ Empire. _Contiguous_, [424] saith he, _to
_Persia_ and _Susiana_ are the _Assyrians_: for so they call _Babylonia_,
and the greatest part of the region about it: part of which is _Arturia_,
wherein is _Ninus [_or_ Nineveh;]_ and _Apolloniatis_, and the _Elymæans_,
and the _Parætacæ_, and _Chalonitis_ by the mountain _Zagrus_, and the
fields near _Ninus_, and _Dolomene_, and _Chalachene_, and _Chazene_, and
_Adiabene_, and the nations of _Mesopotamia_ near the _Gordyæans_, and the
_Mygdones_ about _Nisibis_, unto _Zeugma_ upon _Euphrates_; and a large
region on this side _Euphrates_ inhabited by the _Arabians_ and _Syrians_
properly so called, as far as _Cilicia_ and _Phœnicia_ and _Libya_ and the
sea of _Egypt_ and the _Sinus Issicus__: and a little after describing the
extent of the _Babylonian_ region, he bounds it on the north, with the
_Armenians_ and _Medes_ unto the mountain _Zagrus_; on the east side, with
_Susa_ and _Elymais_ and _Parætacene_, inclusively; on the south, with the
_Persian Gulph_ and _Chaldæa_; and on the west, with the _Arabes Scenitæ_
as far as _Adiabene_ and _Gordyæa_: afterwards speaking of _Susiana_ and
_Sitacene_, a region between _Babylon_ and _Susa_, and of _Parætacene_ and
_Cossæa_ and _Elymais_, and of the _Sagapeni_ and _Siloceni_, two little
adjoining Provinces, he concludes, [425] _and these are the nations which
inhabit _Babylonia_ eastward: to the north are _Media_ and _Armenia_,
_exclusively_, and westward are _Adiabene_ and _Mesopotamia_,
_inclusively_; the greatest part of _Adiabene_ is plain, the same being
part of _Babylonia_: in same places it borders on _Armenia_: for the
_Medes_, _Armenians_ and _Babylonians_ warred frequently on one another_.
Thus far _Strabo_.

When _Cyrus_ took _Babylon_, he changed the Kingdom into a Satrapy or
Province: whereby the bounds were long after known: and by this means
_Herodotus_ [426] gives us an estimate of the bigness of this Monarchy in
proportion to that of the _Persians_, telling us that _whilst every region
over which the King of _Persia_ Reigned in his days, was distributed for
the nourishment of his army, besides the tributes, the _Babylonian_ region
nourished him four months of the twelve in the year, and all the rest of
_Asia_ eight: so the power of the region_, saith he, _is equivalent to the
third part of _Asia_, and its Principality, which the _Persians_ call a
_Satrapy_, is far the best of all the Provinces_.

_Babylon_ [427] was a square city of 120 furlongs, or 15 miles on every
side, compassed first with a broad and deep ditch, and then with a wall
fifty cubits thick, and two hundred high. _Euphrates_ flowed through the
middle of it southward, a few leagues on this side _Tigris_: and in the
middle of one half westward stood the King's new Palace, built by
_Nebuchadnezzar_; and in the middle of the other half stood the Temple of
_Belus_, with the old Palace between that Temple and the river: this old
Palace was built by the _Assyrians_, according to [428] _Isaiah_, and by
consequence, by _Pul_ and his son _Nabonassar_, as above: _they founded the
city for the _Arabians_, and set up the towers thereof, and raised the
Palaces thereof_: and at that time _Sabacon_ the _Ethiopian_ invaded
_Egypt_, and made great multitudes of _Egyptians_ fly from him into
_Chaldæa_, and carry thither their Astronomy, and Astrology, and
Architecture, and the form of their year, which they preserved there in the
_Æra_ of _Nabonassar_: for the practice of observing the Stars began in
_Egypt_ in the days of _Ammon_, as above, and was propagated from thence in
the Reign of his son _Sesac_ into _Afric_, _Europe_, and _Asia_ by
conquest; and then _Atlas_ formed the Sphere of the _Libyans_, and _Chiron_
that of the _Greeks_, and the _Chaldæans_ also made a Sphere of their own.
But Astrology was invented in _Egypt_ by _Nichepsos_, or _Necepsos_, one of
the Kings of the lower _Egypt_, and _Petosiris_ his Priest, a little before
the days of _Sabacon_, and propagated thence into _Chaldæa_, where
_Zoroaster_ the Legislator of the _Magi_ met with it: so _Paulinus_,

  _Quique magos docuit mysteria vana Necepsos_:

And _Diodorus_, [429] _they say that the _Chaldæans_ in _Babylonia_ are
colonies of the _Egyptians_, and being taught by the Priests of _Egypt_
became famous for Astrology_. By the influence of the same colonies, the
Temple of _Jupiter Belus_ in _Babylon_ seems to have been erected in the
form of the _Egyptian_ Pyramids: for [430] this Temple was a solid Tower or
Pyramid a furlong square, and a furlong high, with seven retractions, which
made it appear like eight towers standing upon one another, and growing
less and less to the top: and in the eighth tower was a Temple with a bed
and a golden table, kept by a woman, after the manner of the _Egyptians_ in
the Temple of _Jupiter Ammon_ at _Thebes_; and above the Temple was a place
for observing the Stars: they went up to the top of it by steps on the
outside, and the bottom was compassed with a court, and the court with a
building two furlongs in length on every side.

The _Babylonians_ were extreamly addicted to Sorcery, Inchantments,
Astrology and Divinations, _Isa._ xlvii. 9, 12, 13. _Dan._ ii. 2, & v. 11.
and to the worship of Idols, _Jer._ l. 2, 40. and to feasting, wine and
women. _Nihil urbis ejus corruptius moribus, nec ad irritandas
illiciendasque immodicas voluptates instructius. Liberos conjugesque cum
hospitibus stupro coire, modo pretium flagitii detur, parentes maritique
patiuntur. Convivales ludi tota Perside regibus purpuratisque cordi sunt:
Babylonii maxime in vinum & quæ ebrietatem sequuntur effusi sunt. Fæminarum
convivia ineuntium in principio modestus est habitus; dein summa quæque
amicula exuunt, paulatimque pudorem profanant: ad ultimum, honos auribus
sit, ima corporum velamenta projiciunt. Nec meretricum hoc dedecus est, sed
matronarum virginumque, apud quas comitas habetur vulgati corporis
vilitas._ _Q. Curtius_, lib. v. cap. 1. And this lewdness of their women,
coloured over with the name of civility, was encouraged even by their
religion: for it was the custom for their women once in their life to sit
in the Temple of _Venus_ for the use of strangers; which Temple they called
_Succoth Benoth_, the Temple of Women: and when any woman was once sat
there, she was not to depart 'till some stranger threw money into her
bosom, took her away and lay with her; and the money being for sacred uses,
she was obliged to accept of it how little soever, and follow the stranger.

The _Persians_ being conquered by the _Medes_ about the middle of the Reign
of _Zedekiah_, continued in subjection under them 'till the end of the
Reign of _Darius_ the _Mede_: and _Cyrus_, who was of the Royal Family of
the _Persians_, might be _Satrapa_ of _Persia_, and command a body of their
forces under _Darius_; but was not yet an absolute and independant King:
but after the taking of _Babylon_, when he had a victorious army at his
devotion, and _Darius_ was returned from _Babylon_ into _Media_, he
revolted from _Darius_, in conjunction with the _Persians_ under him; [431]
they being incited thereunto by _Harpagus_ a _Mede_, whom _Xenophon_ calls
_Artagerses_ and _Atabazus_, and who had assisted _Cyrus_ in conquering
_Crœsus_ and _Asia minor_, and had been injured by _Darius_. _Harpagus_ was
sent by _Darius_ with an army against _Cyrus_, and in the midst of a battel
revolted with part of the army to _Cyrus_: _Darius_ got up a fresh army,
and the next year the two armies fought again: this last battel was fought
at _Pasargadæ_ in _Persia_, according to [432] _Strabo_; and there _Darius_
was beaten and taken Prisoner by _Cyrus_, and the Monarchy was by this
victory translated to the _Persians_. The last King of the _Medes_ is by
_Xenophon_ called _Cyaxares_, and by _Herodotus_, _Astyages_ the father of
_Mandane_: but these Kings were dead before, and _Daniel_ lets us know that
_Darius_ was the true name of the last King, and _Herodotus_, [433] that
the last King was conquered by _Cyrus_ in the manner above described; and
the _Darics_ coined by the last King testify that his name was _Darius_.

This victory over _Darius_ was about two years after the taking of
_Babylon_: for the Reign or _Nabonnedus_ the last King of the _Chaldees_,
whom _Josephus_ calls _Naboandel_ and _Belshazzar_, ended in the year of
_Nabonassar_ 210, nine years before the death of _Cyrus_, according to the
Canon: but after the translation of the Kingdom of the _Medes_ to the
_Persians_, _Cyrus_ Reigned only seven years, according to [434]
_Xenophon_; and spending the seven winter months yearly at _Babylon_, the
three spring months yearly at _Susa_, and the two Summer months at
_Ecbatane_, he came the seventh time into _Persia_, and died there in the
spring, and was buried at _Pasargadae_. By the Canon and the common consent
of all Chronologers, he died in the year of _Nabonassar_ 219, and therefore
conquered _Darius_ in the year of _Nabonassar_ 212, seventy and two years
after the destruction of _Nineveh_, and beat him the first time in the year
of _Nabonassar_ 211, and revolted from him, and became King of the
_Persians_, either the same year, or in the end of the year before. At his
death he was seventy years old according to _Herodotus_, and therefore he
was born in the year of _Nabonassar_ 149, his mother _Mandane_ being the
sister of _Cyaxeres_, at that time a young man, and also the sister of
_Amyite_ the wife of _Nebuchadnezzar_, and his father _Cambyses_ being of
the old Royal Family of the _Persians_.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. V.

_A Description of the _TEMPLE_ of _Solomon_._

[435] The Temple of _Solomon_ being destroyed by the _Babylonians_, it may
not be amiss here to give a description of that edifice.

This [436] Temple looked eastward, and stood in a square area, called the
_Separate Place_: and [437] before it stood the _Altar_, in the center of
another square area, called the _Inner Court_, or _Court of the Priests_:
and these two square areas, being parted only by a marble rail, made an
area 200 cubits long from west to east, and 100 cubits broad: this area was
compassed on the west with a wall, and [438] on the other three sides with
a pavement fifty cubits broad, upon which stood the buildings for the
Priests, with cloysters under them: and the pavement was faced on the
inside with a marble rail before the cloysters: the whole made an area 250
cubits long from west to east, and 200 broad, and was compassed with an
outward Court, called also the _Great Court_, or _Court of the People_,
[439] which was an hundred cubits on every side; for there were but two
Courts built by _Solomon_: and the outward Court was about four cubits
lower than the inward, and was compassed on the west with a wall, and on
the other three sides [440] with a pavement fifty cubits broad, upon which
stood the buildings for the People. All this was the [441] _Sanctuary_, and
made a square area 500 cubits long, and 500 broad, and was compassed with a
walk, called the _Mountain of the House_: and this walk being 50 cubits
broad, was compassed with a wall six cubits broad, and six high, and six
hundred long on every side: and the cubit was about 21½, or almost 22
inches of the _English_ foot, being the sacred cubit of the _Jews_, which
was an hand-breadth, or the sixth part of its length bigger than the common
cubit.

The _Altar_ stood in the center of the whole; and in the buildings of [442]
both Courts over against the middle of the _Altar_, eastward, southward,
and northward, were gates [443] 25 cubits broad between the buildings, and
40 long; with porches of ten cubits more, looking towards the _Altar
Court_, which made the whole length of the gates fifty cubits cross the
pavements. Every gate had two doors, one at either [444] end, ten cubits
wide, and twenty high, with posts and thresholds six cubits broad: within
the gates was an area 28 cubits long between the thresholds, and 13 cubits
wide: and on either side of this area were three posts, each six cubits
square, and twenty high, with arches five cubits wide between them: all
which posts and arches filled the 28 cubits in length between the
thresholds; and their breadth being added to the thirteen cubits, made the
whole breadth of the gates 25 cubits. These posts were hollow, and had
rooms in them with narrow windows for the porters, and a step before them a
cubit broad: and the walls of the porches being six cubits thick, were also
hollow for several uses. [445] At the east gate of the _Peoples Court_,
called the _King's gate_, [446] were six porters, at the south gate were
four, and at the north gate were four: the people [447] went in and out at
the south and north gates: the [448] east gate was opened only for the
King, and in this gate he ate the Sacrifices. There were also four gates or
doors in the western wall of the _Mountain of the House_: of these [449]
the most northern, called _Shallecheth_, or the _gate of the causey_, led
to the King's palace, the valley between being filled up with a causey: the
next gate, called _Parbar_, led to the suburbs _Millo_: the third and
fourth gates, called _Asuppim_, led the one to _Millo_, the other to the
city of _Jerusalem_, there being steps down into the valley and up again
into the city. At the gate _Shallecheth_ were four porters; at the other
three gates were six porters, two at each gate: the house of the porters
who had the charge of the north gate of the _People's Court_, had also the
charge of the gates _Shallecheth_ and _Parbar_: and the house of the
porters who had the charge of the south gate of the _People s Court_, had
also the charge of the other two gates called _Asuppim_.

They came through the four western gates into the _Mountain of the House_,
and [450] went up from the _Mountain of the House_, to the gates of the
_People's Court_ by seven steps, and from the _People's Court_ to the gates
of the _Priest's Court_ by eight steps: [451] and the arches in the sides
of the gates of both courts led into cloysters [452] under a double
building, supported by three rows of marble pillars, which butted directly
upon the middles of the square posts, ran along from thence upon the
pavements towards the corners of the Courts: the axes of the pillars in the
middle row being eleven cubits distant from the axes of the pillars in the
other two rows on either hand; and the building joining to the sides of the
gates: the pillars were three cubits in diameter below, and their bases
four cubits and an half square. The gates and buildings of both Courts were
alike, and [453] faced their Courts: the cloysters of all the buildings,
and the porches of all the gates looking towards the _Altar_. The row of
pillars on the backsides of the cloysters adhered to marble walls, which
bounded the cloysters and supported the buildings: [454] these buildings
were three stories high above the cloysters, and [455] were supported in
each of those stories by a row of cedar beams, or pillars of cedar,
standing above the middle row of the marble pillars: the buildings on
either side of every gate of the _People's Court_, being 187½ cubits long,
were distinguished into five chambers on a floor, running in length from
the gates to the corners or the Courts: there [456] being in all thirty
chambers in a story, where the People ate the Sacrifices, or thirty
exhedras, each of which contained three chambers, a lower, a middle, and an
upper: every exhedra was 37½ cubits long, being supported by four pillars
in each row, [457] whose bases were 4½ cubits square, and the distances
between their bases 6½ cubits, and the distances between the axes of the
pillars eleven cubits: and where two [458] exhedras joyned, there the bases
of their pillars joyned; the axes of those two pillars being only 4½ cubits
distant from one another: and perhaps for strengthning the building, the
space between the axes of these two pillars in the front was filled up with
a marble column 4½ cubits square, the two pillars standing half out on
either side of the square column. At the ends of these buildings [459] in
the four corners of the _Peoples Court_, were little Courts fifty cubits
square on the outside of their walls, and forty on the inside thereof, for
stair-cases to the buildings, and kitchins to bake and boil the Sacrifices
for the People, the kitchin being thirty cubits broad, and the stair-case
ten. The buildings on either side of the gates of the _Priests Court_ were
also 37½ cubits long, and contained each of them one great chamber in a
story, subdivided into smaller rooms, for the Great Officers of the Temple,
and Princes of the Priests: and in the south-east and north-east corners of
this court, at the ends of the buildings, were kitchins and stair-cases for
the Great Officers; and perhaps rooms for laying up wood for the _Altar_.

In the eastern gate of the _Peoples Court_, sat a Court of Judicature,
composed of 23 Elders. The eastern gate of the _Priests Court_, with the
buildings on either side, was for the High-Priest, and his deputy the
_Sagan_, and for the _Sanhedrim_ or Supreme Court of Judicature, composed
of seventy Elders. [460] The building or exhedra on the eastern side of the
southern gate, was for the Priests who had the oversight of the charge of
the _Sanctuary_ with its treasuries: and these were, first, two
_Catholikim_, who were High-Treasurers and Secretaries to the High-Priest,
and examined, stated, and prepared all acts and accounts to be signed and
sealed by him; then seven _Amarcholim_, who kept the keys of the seven
locks of every gate of the _Sanctuary_, and those also of the treasuries,
and had the oversight, direction, and appointment of all things in the
_Sanctuary_; then three or more _Gisbarim_, or Under-Treasurers, or
Receivers, who kept the Holy Vessels, and the Publick Money, and received
or disposed of such sums as were brought in for the service of the Temple,
and accounted for the same. All these, with the High-Priest, composed the
Supreme Council for managing the affairs of the Temple.

The Sacrifices [461] were killed on the northern side of the _Altar_, and
flea'd, cut in pieces and salted in the northern gate of the Temple; and
therefore the building or exhedra on the eastern side of this gate, was for
the Priests who had the oversight of the charge of the _Altar_, and Daily
Service: and these Officers were, He that received money of the People for
purchasing things for the Sacrifices, and gave out tickets for the same; He
that upon sight of the tickets delivered the wine, flower and oyl
purchased; He that was over the lots, whereby every Priest attending on the
_Altar_ had his duty assigned; He that upon sight of the tickets delivered
out the doves and pigeons purchased; He that administred physic to the
Priests attending; He that was over the waters; He that was over the times,
and did the duty of a cryer, calling the Priests or Levites to attend in
their ministeries; He that opened the gates in the morning to begin the
service, and shut them in the evening when the service was done, and for
that end received the keys of the _Amarcholim_, and returned them when he
had done his duty; He that visited the night-watches; He that by a Cymbal
called the Levites to their stations for singing; He that appointed the
Hymns and set the Tune; and He that took care of the Shew-Bread: there were
also Officers who took care of the Perfume, the Veil, and the Wardrobe of
the Priests.

The exhedra on the western side of the south gate, and that on the western
side of the north gate, were for the Princes of the four and twenty courses
of the Priests, one exhedra for twelve of the Princes, [462] and the other
exhedra for the other twelve: and upon the pavement on either side of the
_Separate Place_ [463] were other buildings without cloysters, for the four
and twenty courses of the Priests to eat the Sacrifices, and lay up their
garments and the most holy things: each pavement being 100 cubits long, and
50 broad, had buildings on either side of it twenty cubits broad, with a
walk or alley ten cubits broad between them: the building which bordered
upon the _Separate Place_ was an hundred cubits long, and that next the
_Peoples Court_ but fifty, the other fifty cubits westward [464] being for
a stair-case and kitchin: these buildings [465] were three stories high,
and the middle story was narrower in the front than the lower story, and
the upper story still narrower, to make room for galleries; for they had
galleries before them, and under the galleries were closets for laying up
the holy things, and the garments of the Priests, and these galleries were
towards the walk or alley, which ran between the buildings.

They went up from the _Priests Court_ to the Porch of the Temple by ten
steps: and the [466] House of the Temple was twenty cubits broad, and sixty
long within; or thirty broad, and seventy long, including the walls; or
seventy cubits broad, and 90 long, including a building of
treasure-chambers which was twenty cubits broad on three sides of the
House; and if the Porch be also included, the Temple was [467] an hundred
cubits long. The treasure-chambers were built of cedar, between the wall of
the Temple, and another wall without: they were [468] built in two rows
three stories high, and opened door against door into a walk or gallery
which ran along between them, and was five cubits broad in every story; So
that the breadth of the chambers on either side of the gallery, including
the breadth of the wall to which they adjoined, was ten cubits; and the
whole breadth of the gallery and chambers, and both walls, was five and
twenty cubits: the chambers [469] were five cubits broad in the lower
story, six broad in the middle story, and seven broad in the upper story;
for the wall of the Temple was built with retractions of a cubit, to rest
the timber upon. _Ezekiel_ represents the chambers a cubit narrower, and
the walls a cubit thicker than they were in _Solomon_'s Temple: there were
[470] thirty chambers in a story, in all ninety chambers, and they were
five cubits high in every story. The [471] Porch of the Temple was 120
cubits high, and its length from south to north equalled the breadth of the
House: the House was three stories high, which made the height of the _Holy
Place_ three times thirty cubits, and that of the _Most Holy_ three times
twenty: the upper rooms were treasure-chambers; they [472] went up to the
middle chamber by winding stairs in the southern shoulder of the House, and
from the middle into the upper.

Some time after this Temple was built, the _Jews_ [473] added a _New
Court_, on the eastern side of the _Priests Court_, before the _King's
gate_, and therein built [474] a covert for the Sabbath: this Court was not
measured by _Ezekiel_, but the dimensions thereof may be gathered from
those of the _Womens Court_, in the second Temple, built after the example
thereof: for when _Nebuchadnezzar_ had destroyed the first Temple,
_Zerubbabel_, by the commissions of _Cyrus_ and _Darius_, built another
upon the same area, excepting the _Outward Court_, which was left open to
the _Gentiles_: and this Temple [475] was sixty cubits long, and sixty
broad, being only two stories in height, and having only one row of
treasure-chambers about it: and on either side of the _Priests Court_ were
double buildings for the Priests, built upon three rows of marble pillars
in the lower story, with a row of cedar beams or pillars in the stories
above: and the cloyster in the lower story looked towards the _Priests
Court_: and the _Separate Place_, and _Priests Court_, with their buildings
on the north and south sides, and the _Womens Court_, at the east end, took
up an area three hundred cubits long, and two hundred broad, the _Altar_
standing in the center of the whole. The _Womens Court_ was so named,
because the women came into it as well as the men: there were galleries for
the women, and the men worshipped upon the ground below: and in this state
the second Temple continued all the Reign of the _Persians_; but afterwards
suffered some alterations, especially in the days of _Herod_.

This description of the Temple being taken principally from _Ezekiel_'s
Vision thereof; and the ancient _Hebrew_ copy followed by the Seventy,
differing in some readings from the copy followed by the editors of the
present _Hebrew_, I will here subjoin that part of the Vision which relates
to the _Outward Court_, as I have deduced it from the present _Hebrew_, and
the version of the Seventy compared together.

Ezekiel chap. xl. ver. 5, &c.

[476] _And behold a wall on the outside of the House round about_, at the
distance of fifty cubits from it, aabb: _and in the man's hand a measuring
reed six cubits long by the cubit, and an hand-breadth: so he measured the
breadth of the building, _or wall_, one reed, and the height one reed.
_[477]_ Then came he unto the gate _of the House_, which looketh towards
the east, and went up the seven steps thereof, _AB_, and measured the
threshold of the gate, _CD_, which was one reed broad, and the _Porters_
little chamber, _EFG_, one reed long, and one reed broad; and the arched
passage between the little chambers, _FH_, five cubits: and the second
little chamber, _HIK_, a reed broad and a reed long; and the arched
passage, _IL_, five cubits: and the third little chamber _LMN_, a reed long
and a reed broad: and the threshold of the gate next the porch of the gate
within, _OP_, one reed: and he measured the porch of the gate, _QR_, eight
cubits; and the posts thereof _ST_, _st_, two cubits; and the porch of the
gate, _QR_, was inward, _or toward the inward court_; and the little
chambers, _EF_, _HI_, _LM_, _ef_, _hi_, _lm_, were _outward, or_ to the
east; three on this side, and three on that side _of the gate_. There was
one measure of the three, and one measure of the posts on this side, and on
that side; and he measured the breadth of the door of the gate, _Cc_, or
_Dd_, ten cubits; and the breadth of the gate _within between the little
chambers, Ee or Ff_, thirteen cubits; and the limit, or margin, or step
before the little chambers, _EM_, one cubit on this side, and the step,
_em_, one cubit on the other side; and the little chambers, _EFG_, _HIK_,
_LMN_, _efg_, _hik_, _lmn_, were six cubits _broad_ on this side, and six
cubits _broad_ on that side: and he measured _the whole breadth of_ the
gate, from the _further_ wall of one little chamber to the _further_ wall
of another little chamber: the breadth, _Gg, or Kk, or Nn_, was twenty and
five cubits _through_; door, _FH_, against door, _fh_: and he measured the
posts, _EF_, _HI_, and _LM_, _ef_, _hi_, and _lm_, twenty cubits _high_;
and at the posts there were gates, _or arched passages, FH, IL, fh, il_,
round about; and from the _eastern_ face of the gate at the entrance, _Cc_,
to the _western_ face of the porch of the gate within, _Tt_, were fifty
cubits: and there were narrow windows to the little chambers, and to the
porch within the gate, round about, and likewise to the posts; even windows
were round about within: and upon each post were palm trees._

_Then he brought me into the Outward Court, and lo there were chambers, and
a pavement with pillars upon it in the court round about, _[478]_ thirty
chambers _in length_ upon the pavement, supported by the pillars, _ten
chambers on every side, except the western_: and the pavement butted upon
the shoulders or sides of the gates below, _every gate having five chambers
or exhedræ on either side_. And he measured the breadth _of the Outward
Court_, from the fore-front of the lower-gate, to the fore-front of the
inward court, an hundred cubits eastward._

_Then he brought me northward, and there was a gate that looked towards the
north; he measured the length thereof, and the breadth thereof, and the
little chambers thereof, three on this side, and three on that side, and
the posts thereof, and the porch thereof, and it was according to the
measures of the first gate; its length was fifty cubits, and its breadth
was five and twenty: and the windows thereof, and the porch and the
palm-trees thereof _were_ according to the measures of the gate which
looked to the east, and they went up to it by seven steps: and its porch
was before them, _that is inward_. And there was a gate of the inward court
over against _this_ gate of the north, as _in the gates_ to the eastward:
and he measured from gate to gate an hundred cubits._

       *       *       *       *       *

_A Description of THE TEMPLE OF SOLOMON_

[Illustration: _Plate_ I. _p. 346._]

ABCD. _The Separate Place in which stood the Temple._

ABEF. _The Court of y^{e} Priests._

G. _The Altar._

DHLKICEFD. _A Pavement compassing three sides of the foremention'd Courts,
and upon which stood the Buildings for the Priests, with Cloysters under
them._

MNOP. _The Court of the People._

MQTSRN. _A Pavement compassing three sides of the Peoples Court, upon which
stood the Buildings for the People, with Cloysters under them._

UXYZ. _The Mountain of the House._

aabb._ A Wall enclosing the whole._

c. _The Gate Shallecheth._

d. _The Gate Parbar._

ef. _The two Gates Assupim._

g. _The East Gate of the Peoples Court, call'd the Kings Gate._

hh. _The North and South Gates of the same Court._

iiii. _The chambers over the Cloysters of the Peoples Court where the
People ate the Sacrifices, 30 Chambers in each Story._

kkkk. _Four little Courts serving for Stair Cases and Kitchins for the
People._

l. _The Eastern Gate of the Priests Court, over which sate the Sanhedrin._

m. _The Southern Gate of the Priests Court._

n. _The Northern Gate of the same Court, where the Sacrifices were flea'd
&c._

opqrst. _The Buildings over the Cloysters for the Priests, viz six large
Chambers (subdivided) in each Story, whereof _o_ and _p_ were for the High
Priest and Sagan, _q_ for the Overseers of the Sanctuary and Treasury, _r_
for the Overseers of the Altar and Sacrifice and _s_ and _t_ for the
Princes of the twenty four Courses of Priests._

uu. _Two Courts in which were Stair Cases and Kitchins for the Priests._

x. _The House or Temple which (together with the Treasure Chambers _y_, and
Buildings _zz_ on each side of the Separate Place) is more particularly
describ'd on the second Plate._

       *       *       *       *       *

_A Description of the Inner Court & Buildings for the Priests in Solomons
Temple._

[Illustration: _Plate_ II. _p. 346._]

ABCD. _The Separate Place._

ABEF. _The Inner Court, or Court of the Priests, parted from the Separate
Place, and and Pavement on the other three sides, by a marble rail._

G. _The Altar._

HHH. _The East, South, & North Gates of the Priests Court._

III. _&c. The Cloysters supporting the Buildings for the Priests._

KK. _Two Courts in which were Stair Cases and Kitchins for the Priests._

L. _Ten Steps to the Porch of the Temple._

M. _The Porch of the Temple._

N. _The Holy Place._

O. _The most Holy Place._

PPPP. _Thirty Treasure-Chambers, in two rows, opening into a gallery, door
against door, and compassing three sides of the Holy & most Holy Places._

Q. _The Stairs leading to the Middle Chamber._

RRRR. _&c. The buildings for the four and twenty Courses of Priests, upon
the Pavement on either side of the Separate Place, three Stories high
without Cloysters, but the upper Stories narrower than the lower, to make
room for Galleries before them. There were 24 Chambers in each Story and
they opend into a walk or alley, _SS._ between the Buildings._

TT. _Two Courts in which were Kitchins for the Priests of the twenty four
Courses._

       *       *       *       *       *

_A Particular Description of one of the Gates of the Peoples Court, with
part of the Cloyster adjoyning._

[Illustration: _Plate_ III. _p. 346._]

uw. _The inner margin of the Pavement compassing three sides of the Peoples
Court._

xxx. _&c. The Pillars of the Cloyster supporting the Buildings for the
People._

yyyy. _Double Pillars where two Exhedræ joyned, and whose interstices in
the front _zz_ were filled up with a square Column of Marble._

Note _The preceding letters of this Plate refer to the description in pag.
344 345._

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. VI.

_Of the Empire of the _Persians_._

_Cyrus_ having translated the Monarchy to the _Persians_, and Reigned seven
years, was succeeded by his son _Cambyses_, who Reigned seven years and
five months, and in the three last years of his Reign subdued _Egypt_: he
was succeeded by _Mardus_, or _Smerdis_ the _Magus_, who feigned himself to
be _Smerdis_ the brother of _Cambyses_.

_Smerdis_ Reigned seven months, and in the eighth month being discovered,
was slain, with a great number of the _Magi_; so the _Persians_ called
their Priests, and in memory of this kept an anniversary day, which they
called, _The slaughter of the _Magi__. Then Reigned _Maraphus_ and
_Artaphernes_ a few days, and after them _Darius_ the son of _Hystaspes_,
the son of _Arsamenes_, of the family of _Achæmenes_, a _Persian_, being
chosen King by the neighing of his horse: before he Reigned his [479] name
was _Ochus_. He seems on this occasion to have reformed the constitution of
the _Magi_, making his father _Hystaspes_ their Master, or _Archimagus_;
for _Porphyrius_ tells us, [480] that _the _Magi_ were a sort of men so
venerable amongst the _Persians_, that _Darius_ the son of _Hystaspes_
wrote on the monument of his father_, amongst other things, _that he had
been the Master of the _Magi__. In this reformation of the _Magi_,
_Hystaspes_ was assisted by _Zoroastres_: so _Agathias_; _The _Persians_ at
this day say simply that _Zoroastres_ lived under _Hystaspes__: and
_Apuleius_; _Pythagoram, aiunt, inter captivos Cambysæ Regis _[ex Ægypto
Babylonem abductos]_ doctores habuisse Persarum Magos, & præcipue
Zoroastrem, omnis divini arcani Antistitem_. By _Zoroastres_'s conversing
at _Babylon_ he seems to have borrowed his skill from the _Chaldæans_; for
he was skilled in Astronomy, and used their year: so _Q. Curtius_; [481]
_Magi proximi patrium carmen canebant: Magos trecenti & sexaginta quinque
juvenes sequebantur, puniceis amiculis velati, diebus totius anni pares
numero_: and _Ammianus_; _Scientiæ multa ex Chaldæorum arcanis Bactrianus
addidit Zoroastres_. From his conversing in several places he is reckoned a
_Chaldæan_, an _Assyrian_, a _Mede_, a _Persian_, a _Bactrian_. _Suidas_
calls him [482] a _Perso-Mede_, and saith that he was _the most skilful of
Astronomers, and first author of the name of the _Magi_ received among
them_. This skill in Astronomy he had doubtless from the _Chaldæans_, but
_Hystaspes_ travelled into _India_, to be instructed by the
_Gymnosophists_: and these two conjoyning their skill and authority,
instituted a new set of Priests or _Magi_, and instructed them in such
ceremonies and mysteries of Religion and Philosophy as they thought fit to
establish for the Religion and Philosophy of that Empire; and these
instructed others, 'till from a small number they grew to a great
multitude: for _Suidas_ tells us, that _Zoroastres gave a beginning to the
name of the _Magi__: and _Elmacinus_; that _he reformed the religion of the
_Persians_, which before was divided into many sects_: and _Agathias_; that
_he introduced the religion of the _Magi_ among the _Persians_, changing
their ancient sacred rites, and bringing in several opinions_: and
_Ammianus_ [483] tells us, _Magiam esse divinorum incorruptissimum cultum,
cujus scientiæ seculis priscis multa ex Chaldæorum arcanis Bactrianus
addidit Zoroastres: deinde Hystaspes Rex prudentissimus Darii pater; qui
quum superioris Indiæ secreta fidentius penetraret, ad nemorosam quamdam
venerat solitudinem, cujus tranquillis silentiis præcelsa Brachmanorum
ingenia potiuntur; eorumque monitu rationes mundani motus & siderum,
purosque sacrorum ritus quantum colligere potuit eruditus, ex his quæ
didicit, aliqua sensibus Magorum infudit; quæ illi cum disciplinis
præsentiendi futura, per suam quisque progeniem, posteris ætatibus tradunt.
Ex eo per sæcula multa ad præsens, una eademque prosapia multitudo creata,
Deorum cultibus dedicatur. Feruntque, si justum est credi, etiam ignem
cœlitus lapsum apud se sempiternis foculis custodiri, cujus portionem
exiguam ut faustam præisse quondam Asiaticis Regibus dicunt: Hujus originis
apud veteres numerus erat exilis, ejusque mysteriis Persicæ potestates in
faciendis rebus divinis solemniter utebantur. Eratque piaculum aras adire,
vel hostiam contrectare, antequam Magus conceptis precationibus libamenta
diffunderet præcursoria. Verum aucti paullatim, in amplitudinem gentis
solidæ concesserunt & nomen: villasque inhabitantes nulla murorum
firmitudine communitas & legibus suis uti permissi, religionis respectu
sunt honorati_. So this Empire was at first composed of many nations, each
of which had hitherto its own religion: but now _Hystaspes_ and
_Zoroastres_ collected what they conceived to be best, established it by
law, and taught it to others, and those to others, 'till their disciples
became numerous enough for the Priesthood of the whole Empire; and instead
of those various old religions, they set up their own institutions in the
whole Empire, much after the manner that _Numa_ contrived and instituted
the religion of the _Romans_: and this religion of the _Persian_ Empire was
composed partly of the institutions of the _Chaldæans_, in which
_Zoroastres_ was well skilled; and partly of the institutions of the
ancient _Brachmans_, who are supposed to derive even their name from the
_Abrahamans_, or sons of _Abraham_, born of his second wife _Keturah_,
instructed by their father in the worship of ONE GOD without images, and
sent into the east, where _Hystaspes_ was instructed by their successors.
About the same time with _Hystapes_ and _Zoroastres_, lived also _Ostanes_,
another eminent _Magus_: _Pliny_ places him under _Darius Hystaspis_, and
_Suidas_ makes him the follower of _Zoroastres_: he came into _Greece_ with
_Xerxes_, and seems to be the _Otanes_ of _Herodotus_, who discovered
_Smerdis_, and formed the conspiracy against him, and for that service was
honoured by the conspirators, and exempt from subjection to _Darius_.

In the sacred commentary of the _Persian_ rites these words are ascribed to
_Zoroastres_; [484] ‛Ο Θεος εστι κεφαλην εχων ‛ιερακος. ‛ουτος εστιν ‛ο
πρωτος, αφθαρτος, αιδιος, αγενητος, αμερης, ανομοιοτατος, ‛ηνιοχος παντος
καλου, αδωροδοκητος, αγαθων αγαθωτατος, φρονιμων φρονιμωτατος· εστι δε και
πατηρ ευνομιας και δικαιοσυνης, αυτοδιδακτος, φυσικος, και τελειος, και
σοφος, και ‛ιερου φυσικου μονος ‛ευρετης. _Deus est accipitris capite: hic
est primus, incorruptibilis, æternus, ingenitus, sine partibus, omnibus
aliis dissimillimus, moderator omnis boni, donis non capiendus, bonorum
optimus, prudentium prudentissimus, legum æquitatis ac justitiæ parens,
ipse sui doctor, physicus & perfectus & sapiens & sacri physici unicus
inventor_: and the same was taught by _Ostanes_, in his book called
_Octateuchus_. This was the Antient God of the _Persian Magi_, and they
worshipped him by keeping a perpetual fire for Sacrifices upon an Altar in
the center of a round area, compassed with a ditch, without any Temple in
the place, and without paying any worship to the dead, or any images. But
in a short time they declined from the worship of this Eternal, Invisible
God, to worship the Sun, and the Fire, and dead men, and images, as the
_Egyptians_, _Phœnicians_, and _Chaldæans_ had done before: and from these
superstitions, and the pretending to prognostications, the words _Magi_ and
_Magia_, which signify the Priests and Religion of the _Persians_, came to
be taken in an ill sense.

_Darius_, or _Darab_, began his Reign in spring, in the sixteenth year of
the Empire of the _Persians_, _Anno Nabonass._ 227, and Reigned 36 years,
by the unanimous consent of all Chronologers. In the second year of his
Reign the _Jews_ began to build the Temple, by the prophesying of _Haggai_
and _Zechariah_, and finished it in the sixth. He fought the _Greeks_ at
_Marathon_ in _October_, _Anno Nabonass._ 258, ten years before the battel
at _Salamis_, and died in the fifth year following, in the end of winter,
or beginning of spring, _Anno Nabonass._ 263. The years of _Cambyses_ and
_Darius_ are determined by three Eclipses of the Moon recorded by
_Ptolemy_, so that they cannot be disputed: and by those Eclipses, and the
Prophesies of _Haggai_ and _Zechariah_ compared together, it is manifest
that the years of _Darius_ began after the 24th day of the eleventh
_Jewish_ month, and before the 24th day of _April_, and by consequence in
_March_ or _April_.

_Xerxes_, _Achschirosch_, _Achsweros_, or _Oxyares_, succeeded his father
_Darius_, and spent the first five years of his Reign, and something more,
in preparations for his Expedition against the _Greeks_: and this
Expedition was in the time of the Olympic Games, in the beginning of the
first year of the 75th Olympiad, _Callias_ being _Archon_ at _Athens_; as
all Chronologers agree. The great number of people which he drew out of
_Susa_ to invade _Greece_, made _Æschylus_ the Poet say [485]:

  Το δ' αστυ Σουσων εξεκεινωσεν πεσον.
  _It emptied the falling city of _Susa_._

The passage of his army over the _Hellespont_ began in the end of the
fourth year of the 74th Olympiad, that is in _June_, _Anno Nabonass._ 268,
and took up a month; and in autumn, after three months more, on the 16th
day of the month _Munychion_, at the full moon, was the battel at
_Salamis_; and a little after that an Eclipse of the Moon, which by the
calculation fell on _Octob._ 2. His first year therefore began in spring,
_Anno Nabonass._ 263, as above: he Reigned almost twenty one years by the
consent of all writers, and was murdered by _Artabanus_, captain of his
guards; towards the end of winter, _Anno Nabonass._ 284.

_Artabanus_ Reigned seven months, and upon suspicion of treason against
_Xerxes_, was slain by _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, the son of _Xerxes_.

_Artaxerxes_ began his Reign in the autumnal half year, between the 4th and
9th _Jewish_ months, _Nehem._ i. 1. & ii. 1, & v. 14. and _Ezra_ vii. 7, 8,
9. and his 20th year fell in with the 4th year of the 83d Olympiad, as
_Africanus_ [486] informs us, and therefore his first year began within a
month or two or the autumnal Equinox, _Anno Nabonass._ 284. _Thucydides_
relates that the news of his death came to _Athens_ in winter, in the
seventh year of the _Peloponnesian_ war, that is _An._ 4. Olymp. 88. and by
the Canon he Reigned forty one years, including the Reign of his
predecessor _Artabanus_, and died about the middle of winter, _Anno
Nabonass._ 325 _ineunte_: the _Persians_ now call him _Ardschir_ and
_Bahaman_, the Oriental Christians _Artahascht_.

Then Reigned _Xerxes_, two months, and _Sogdian_ seven months, and _Darius
Nothus_, the bastard son of _Artaxerxes_, nineteen years wanting four or
five months; and _Darius_ died in summer, a little after the end of the
_Peloponnesian_ war, and in the same Olympic year, and by consequence in
_May_ or _June_, _Anno Nabonass._ 344. The 13th year of his Reign was
coincident in winter with the 20th of the _Peloponnesian_ war, and the
years of that war are stated by indisputable characters, and agreed on by
all Chronologers: the war began in spring, _Ann._ 1. Olymp. 87, lasted 27
years, and ended _Apr._ 14. _An._ 4. Olymp. 93.

The next King was _Artaxerxes Mnemon_, the son of _Darius_: he Reigned
forty six years, and died _Anno Nabonass._ 390. Then Reigned _Artaxerxes
Ochus_ twenty one years; _Arses_, or _Arogus_, two years, and _Darius
Codomannus_ four years, unto the battel of _Arbela_, whereby the _Persian_
Monarchy was translated to the _Greeks_, _Octob._ 2. _An. Nabonass._ 417;
but _Darius_ was not slain untill a year and some months after.

I have hitherto stated the times of this Monarchy out of the _Greek_ and
_Latin_ writers: for the _Jews_ knew nothing more of the _Babylonian_ and
_Medo-Persian_ Empires than what they have out of the sacred books of the
old Testament; and therefore own no more Kings, nor years of Kings, than
they can find in those books: the Kings they reckon are only
_Nebuchadnezzar_, _Evilmerodach_, _Belshazzar_, _Darius_ the _Mede_,
_Cyrus_, _Ahasuerus_, and _Darius_ the _Persian_; this last _Darius_ they
reckon to be the _Artaxerxes_, in whose Reign _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_ came to
_Jerusalem_, accounting _Artaxerxes_ a common name of the _Persian_ Kings:
_Nebuchadnezzar_, they say, Reigned forty five years, 2 _King._ xxv. 27.
_Belshazzar_ three years, _Dan._ viii. 1. and therefore _Evilmerodach_
twenty three, to make up the seventy years captivity; excluding the first
year of _Nebuchadnezzar_, in which they say the Prophesy of the seventy
years was given. To _Darius_ the _Mede_ they assign one year, or at most
but two, _Dan._ ix. 1. to _Cyrus_ three years incomplete, _Dan._ x. 1. to
_Ahasuerus_ twelve years 'till the casting of _Pur_, _Esth._ iii. 7. one
year more 'till the _Jews_ smote their enemies, _Esth._ ix. 1. and one year
more 'till _Esther_ and _Mordecai_ wrote the second letter for the keeping
of _Purim_, _Esth._ ix. 29. in all fourteen years: and to _Darius_ the
_Persian_ they allot thirty two or rather thirty six years, _Nehem._ xiii.
6. So that the _Persian_ Empire from the building of the Temple in the
Second year of _Darius Hystaspis_, flourished only thirty four years, until
_Alexander_ the great overthrew it: thus the _Jews_ reckon in their greater
Chronicle, _Seder Olam Rabbah_. _Josephus_, out of the sacred and other
books, reckons only these Kings of _Persia_; _Cyrus_, _Cambyses_, _Darius
Hystaspis_, _Xerxes_, _Artaxerxes_, and _Darius_: and taking this _Darius_,
who was _Darius Nothus_, to be one and the same King with the last
_Darius_, whom _Alexander_ the great overcame; by means of this reckoning
he makes _Sanballat_ and _Jaddua_ alive when _Alexander_ the great
overthrew the _Persian_ Empire. Thus all the _Jews_ conclude the _Persian_
Empire with _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, and _Darius Nothus_, allowing no more
Kings of _Persia_, than they found in the books of _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_;
and referring to the Reigns of this _Artaxerxes_, and this _Darius_,
whatever they met with in profane history concerning the following Kings of
the same names: so as to take _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, _Artaxerxes Mnemon_
and _Artaxerxes Ochus_, for one and the same _Artaxerxes_; and _Darius
Nothus_, and _Darius Codomannus_, for one and the same _Darius_; and
_Jaddua_, and _Simeon Justus_, for one and the same High-Priest. Those
_Jews_ who took _Herod_ for the _Messiah_, and were thence called
_Herodians_, seem to have grounded their opinion upon the seventy weeks of
years, which they found between the Reign of _Cyrus_ and that of _Herod_:
but afterwards, in applying the Prophesy to _Theudas_, and _Judas_ of
_Galilee_, and at length to _Barchochab_, they seem to have shortned the
Reign of the Kingdom of _Persia_. These accounts being very imperfect, it
was necessary to have recourse to the records of the _Greeks_ and
_Latines_, and to the Canon recited by _Ptolemy_, for stating the times of
this Empire. Which being done, we have a better ground for understanding
the history of the _Jews_ set down in the books of _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_,
and adjusting it; for this history having suffered by time, wants some
illustration: and first I shall state the history of the _Jews_ under
_Zerubbabel_, in the Reigns of _Cyrus_, _Cambysis_, and _Darius Hystaspis_.

This history is contained partly in the three first chapters of the book of
_Ezra_, and first five verses of the fourth; and partly in the book of
_Nehemiah_, from the 5th verse of the seventh chapter to the 9th verse of
the twelfth: for _Nehemiah_ copied all this out of the Chronicles of the
_Jews_, written before his days; as may appear by reading the place, and
considering that the Priests and Levites who sealed the Covenant on the
24th day of the seventh month, _Nehem._ x. were the very same with those
who returned from captivity in the first year of _Cyrus_, _Nehem._ xii. and
that all those who returned sealed it: this will be perceived by the
following comparison of their names.

The Priests who returned.       The Priests who sealed.

_Nehemiah._ _Ezra_ ii. 2.       _Nehemiah._

_Serajah._                      _Serajah._

*                               _Azariah._

_Jeremiah._                     _Jeremiah._

_Ezra._                         _Ezra._ _Nehem._ 8.

*                               _Pashur._

_Amariah._                      _Amariah._

_Malluch_: or _Melicu_, _Neh._  _Malchijah._
xii. 2, 14.

_Hattush_.                      _Hattush._

_Shechaniah_ or _Shebaniah_,    _Shebaniah._
_Neh._ xii. 3, 14.

*                               _Malluch._

_Rehum_: or _Harim_, _ib._ 3,   _Harim._
15.

_Meremoth._                     _Meremoth._

_Iddo._                         _Obadiah_ or _Obdia_.

*                               _Daniel._

_Ginnetho_: or _Ginnethon_,     _Ginnethon._
_Neh._ xii. 4, 16.

*                               _Baruch._

*                               _Meshullam._

_Abijah._                       _Abijah._

_Miamin._                       _Mijamin._

_Maadiah._                      _Maaziah._

_Bilgah._                       _Bilgai._

_Shemajah._                     _Shemajah._

_Jeshua._                       _Jeshua._

_Binnui._                       _Binnui._

_Kadmiel._                      _Kadmiel._

_Sherebiah._ שרביה.             _Shebaniah._ שבניה.

_Judah_: or _Hodaviah_,         _Hodijah._
_Ezra_ ii. 40. & iii. 9.
Ωδουια; _Septuag._

The _Levites_, _Jeshua_, _Kadmiel_, and _Hodaviah_ or _Judah_, here
mentioned, are reckoned chief fathers among the people who returned with
_Zerubbabel_, _Ezra_ ii. 40. and they assisted as well in laying the
foundation of the Temple, _Ezra_ iii. 9. as in reading the law, and making
and sealing the covenant, _Nehem._ viii. 7. & ix. 5. & x. 9, 10.

Comparing therefore the books of _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_ together; the
history of the _Jews_ under _Cyrus_, _Cambyses_, and _Darius Hystaspis_, is
that they returned from captivity under _Zerubbabel_, in the first year of
_Cyrus_, with the Holy Vessels and a commission to build the Temple; and
came to _Jerusalem_ and _Judah_, every one to his city, and dwelt in their
cities untill the seventh month; and then coming to _Jerusalem_, they first
built the Altar, and on the first day of the seventh month began to offer
the daily burnt-offerings, and read in the book of the Law, and they kept a
solemn fast, and sealed a Covenant; and thenceforward the Rulers of the
people dwelt at _Jerusalem_, and the rest of the people cast lots, to dwell
one in ten at _Jerusalem_, and the rest in the cities of _Judah_: and in
the second year of their coming, in the second month, which was six years
before the death of _Cyrus_, they laid the foundation of the Temple; but
_the adversaries of _Judah_ troubled them in building, and hired
counsellors against them all the days of _Cyrus__, and longer, _even until
the Reign of _Darius_ King of _Persia__: but in the second year of his
Reign, by the prophesying of _Haggai_ and _Zechariah_, they returned to the
work; and by the help of a new decree from _Darius_, finished it on the
third day of the month _Adar_, in the sixth year of his Reign, and kept the
Dedication with joy, and the Passover, and Feast of Unleavened Bread.

Now this _Darius_ was not _Darius Nothus_, but _Darius Hystaspis_, as I
gather by considering that the second year of this _Darius_ was the
seventieth of the indignation against _Jerusalem_, and the cities of
_Judah_, which indignation commenced with the invasion of _Jerusalem_, and
the cities of _Judah_ by _Nebuchadnezzar_, in the ninth year of _Zedekiah_,
_Zech._ i. 12. _Jer._ xxxiv. 1, 7, 22. & xxxix. 1. and that the fourth year
of this _Darius_, was the seventieth from the burning of the Temple in the
eleventh year of _Zedekiah_, _Zech._ vii. 5. & _Jer._ lii. 12. both which
are exactly true of _Darius Hystaspis_: and that in the second year of this
_Darius_ there were men living who had seen the first Temple, _Hagg._ ii.
3. whereas the second year of _Darius Nothus_ was 166 years after the
desolation of the Temple and City. And further, if the finishing of the
Temple be deferred to the sixth year of _Darius Nothus_, _Jeshua_ and
_Zerubbabel_ must have been the one High-Priest, the other Captain of the
people an hundred and eighteen years together, besides their ages before;
which is surely too long: for in the first year of _Cyrus_ the chief
Priests were _Serajah_, _Jeremiah_, _Ezra_, _Amariah_, _Malluch_,
_Shechaniah_, _Rehum_, _Meremoth_, _Iddo_, _Ginnetho_, _Abijah_, _Miamin_,
_Maadiah_, _Bilgah_, _Shemajah_, _Joiarib_, _Jedaiah_, _Sallu_, _Amok_,
_Hilkiah_, _Jedaiah_: these were Priests in the days of _Jeshua_, and the
eldest sons of them all, _Merajah_ the son of _Serajah_, _Hananiah_ the son
of _Jeremiah_, _Meshullam_ the son of _Ezra_, &c. were chief Priests in the
days of _Joiakim_ the son of _Jeshua_: _Nehem._ xii. and therefore the High
Priest-hood of _Jeshua_ was but of an ordinary length.

I have now stated the history of the _Jews_ in the Reigns of _Cyrus_,
_Cambyses_, and _Darius Hystaspis_: it remains that I state their history
in the Reigns of _Xerxes_, and _Artaxerxes Longimanus_: for I place the
history of _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_ in the Reign of this _Artaxerxes_, and not
in that of _Artaxerxes Mnemon_: for during all the _Persian_ Monarchy,
until the last _Darius_ mentioned in Scripture, whom I take to be _Darius
Nothus_, there were but six High-Priests in continual succession of father
and son, namely, _Jeshua_, _Joiakim_, _Eliashib_, _Joiada_, _Jonathan_,
_Jaddua_, and the seventh High-Priest was _Onias_ the son of _Jaddua_, and
the eighth was _Simeon Justus_, the Son of _Onias_, and the ninth was
_Eleazar_ the younger brother of _Simeon_. Now, at a mean reckoning, we
should allow about 27 or 28 years only to a Generation by the eldest sons
of a family, one Generation with another, as above; but if in this case we
allow 30 years to a Generation, and may further suppose that _Jeshua_, at
the return of the captivity in the first year of the Empire of the
_Persians_, was about 30 or 40 years old; _Joiakim_ will be of about that
age in the 16th year of _Darius Hystaspis_, _Eliashib_ in the tenth year of
_Xerxes_, _Joiada_ in the 19th year of _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, _Jonathan_
in the 8th year of _Darius Nothus_, _Jaddua_ in the 19th year of
_Artaxerxes Mnemon_, _Onias_ in the 3d year of _Artaxerxes Ochus_, and
_Simeon Justus_ two years before the death of _Alexander_ the Great: and
this reckoning, as it is according to the course of nature, so it agrees
perfectly well with history; for thus _Eliashib_ might be High-Priest, and
have grandsons, before the seventh year of _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, _Ezra_
x. 6. and without exceeding the age which many old men attain unto,
continue High-Priest 'till after the 32d year of that King, _Nehem._ xiii.
6, 7. and his grandson _Johanan_, or _Jonathan_, might have a chamber in
the Temple in the seventh year of that King, _Ezra_ x. 6. and be
High-Priest before _Ezra_ wrote the sons of _Levi_ in the book of
_Chronicles_; _Nehem._ xii. 23. and in his High-Priesthood, he might slay
his younger brother _Jesus_ in the Temple, before the end of the Reign of
_Artaxerxes Mnemon_: _Joseph. Antiq._ l. xi. c. 7. and _Jaddua_ might be
High-Priest before the death of _Sanballat_, _Joseph._ _ib._ and before the
death of _Nehemiah_, _Nehem._ xii. 22. and also before the end of the Reign
of _Darius Nothus_; and he might thereby give occasion to _Josephus_ and
the later _Jews_, who took this King for the last _Darius_, to fall into an
opinion that _Sanballat, Jaddua_, and _Manasseh_ the younger brother of
_Jaddua_, lived till the end of the Reign of the last _Darius_: _Joseph._
_Antiq._ l. xi. c. 7, 8. and the said _Manasseh_ might marry _Nicaso_ the
daughter of _Sanballat_, and for that offence be chased from _Nehemiah_,
before the end of the Reign of _Artaxerxes Longimanus_; _Nehem_. xiii. 28.
_Joseph._ _Antiq._ l. xi. c. 7, 8. and _Sanballat_ might at that time be
_Satrapa_ of _Samaria_, and in the Reign of _Darius Nothus_, or soon after,
build the Temple of the _Samaritans_ in _Mount Gerizim_, for his son-in-law
_Manasseh_, the first High-Priest of that Temple; _Joseph._ _ib._ and
_Simeon Justus_ might be High-Priest when the _Persian_ Empire was invaded
by _Alexander_ the Great, as the _Jews_ represent, _Joma_ fol. 69. 1.
_Liber Juchasis. R. Gedaliah_, &c. and for that reason he might be taken by
some of the _Jews_ for the same High-Priest with _Jaddua_, and be dead some
time before the book of _Ecclesiasticus_ was writ in _Hebrew_ at
_Jerusalem_, by the grandfather of him, who in the 38th year of the
_Egyptian_ Æra of _Dionysius_, that is in the 77th year after the death of
_Alexander_ the Great, met with a copy of it in _Egypt_, and there
translated it into _Greek: Ecclesiast._ ch. 50. & _in Prolog._ and
_Eleazar_, the younger brother and successor of _Simeon_, might cause the
Law to be translated into _Greek_, in the beginning of the Reign of
_Ptolemaus Philadelphus_: _Joseph._ _Antiq._ l. xii. c. 2. and _Onias_ the
son of _Simeon Justus_, who was a child at his father's death, and by
consequence was born in his father's old age, might be so old in the Reign
of _Ptolemæus Euergetes_, as to have his follies excused to that King, by
representing that he was then grown childish with old age. _Joseph._
_Antiq._ l. xii. c. 4. In this manner the actions of all these High-Priests
suit with the Reigns of the Kings, without any straining from the course of
nature: and according to this reckoning the days of _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_
fall in with the Reign of the first _Artaxerxes_; for _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_
flourished in the High Priesthood of _Eliashib_, _Ezra_ x. 6. _Nehem._ iii.
1. & xiii. 4, 28. But if _Eliashib_, _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_ be placed in the
Reign of the second _Artaxerxes_, since they lived beyond the 32d year of
_Artaxerxes_, _Nehem._ xiii. 28, there must be at least 160 years allotted
to the three first High-Priests, and but 42 to the four or five last, a
division too unequal: for the High Priesthoods of _Jeshua_, _Joiakim_, and
_Eliashib_, were but of an ordinary length, that of _Jeshua_ fell in with
one Generation of the chief Priests, and that of _Joiakim_ with the next
Generation, as we have shewed already; and that of _Eliashib_ fell in with
the third Generation: for at the dedication of the wall, _Zechariah_ the
son of _Jonathan_, the son of _Shemaiah_, was one of the Priests, _Nehem._
xii. 35, and _Jonathan_ and his father _Shemaiah_, were contemporaries to
_Joiakim_ and his father _Jeshua_: _Nehem._ xii. 6, 18. I observe further
that in the first year of _Cyrus_, _Jeshua_, and _Bani_, or _Binnui_, were
chief fathers of the _Levites_, _Nehem_. vii. 7. 15. & _Ezra_ ii. 2. 10. &
iii. 9. and that _Jozabad_ the son of _Jeshua_, and _Noadiah_ the son of
_Binnui_, were chief Levites in the seventh year of _Artaxerxes_, when
_Ezra_ came to _Jerusalem_, _Ezra_ viii. 33. so that this _Artaxerxes_
began his Reign before the end of the second Generation: and that he
Reigned in the time of the third Generation is confirmed by two instances
more; for _Meshullam_ the son of _Berechiah_, the son of _Meshezabeel_, and
_Azariah_ the son of _Maaseiah_, the son of _Ananiah_, were fathers of
their houses at the repairing of the wall; _Nehem._ iii. 4, 23. and their
grandfathers, _Meshazabeel_ and _Hananiah_, subscribed the covenant in the
Reign of _Cyrus_: _Nehem._ x. 21, 23. Yea _Nehemiah_, this same _Nehemiah_
the son of _Hachaliah_, was the _Tirshatha_, and subscribed it, _Nehem._ x.
1, & viii. 9, & _Ezra_ ii. 2, 63. and therefore in the 32d year of
_Artaxerxes Mnemon_, he will be above 180 years old, an age surely too
great. The same may be said of _Ezra_, if he was that Priest and Scribe who
read the Law, _Nehem._ viii. for he is the son of _Serajah_, the son of
_Azariah_, the son of _Hilkiah_, the son of _Shallum_, &c. _Ezra_ vii. 1.
and this _Serajah_ went into captivity at the burning of the Temple, and
was there slain, 1 _Chron._ vi. 14. 2 _King._ xxv. 18. and from his death,
to the twentieth year of _Artaxerxes Mnemon_, is above 200 years; an age
too great for _Ezra_.

I consider further that _Ezra_, chap. iv. names _Cyrus_, *, _Darius_,
_Ahasuerus_, and _Artaxerxes_, in continual order, as successors to one
another, and these names agree to _Cyrus_, *, _Darius Hystaspis_, _Xerxes_,
and _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, and to no other Kings of _Persia_: some take
this _Artaxerxes_ to be not the Successor, but the Predecessor of _Darius
Hystaspis_, not considering that in his Reign the _Jews_ were busy in
building the City and the Wall, _Ezra_ iv. 12. and by consequence had
finished the Temple before. _Ezra_ describes first how the people of the
land hindered the building of the Temple all the days of _Cyrus_, and
further, untill the Reign of _Darius_; and after the Temple was built, how
they hindered the building of the city in the Reign of _Ahasuerus_ and
_Artaxerxes_, and then returns back to the story of the Temple in the Reign
of _Cyrus_ and _Darius_; and this is confirmed by comparing the book of
_Ezra_ with the book of _Esdras_: for if in the book of _Ezra_ you omit the
story of _Ahasuerus_ and _Artaxerxes_, and in that of _Esdras_ you omit the
same story of _Artaxerxes_, and that of the three wise men, the two books
will agree: and therefore the book of _Esdras_, if you except the story of
the three wise men, was originally copied from authentic writings of Sacred
Authority. Now the story of _Artaxerxes_, which, with that of _Ahasuerus_,
in the book of _Ezra_ interrupts the story of _Darius_, doth not interrupt
it in the book of _Esdras_, but is there inferred into the story of
_Cyrus_, between the first and second chapter of _Ezra_; and all the rest
of the story of _Cyrus_, and that of _Darius_, is told in the book of
_Esdras_ in continual order, without any interruption: so that the _Darius_
which in the book of _Ezra_ precedes _Ahasuerus_ and _Artaxerxes_, and the
_Darius_ which in the same book follows them, is, by the book of _Esdras_,
one and the same _Darius_; and I take the book of _Esdras_ to be the best
interpreter of the book of _Ezra_: so the _Darius_ mentioned between
_Cyrus_ and _Ahasuerus_, is _Darius Hysaspis_; and therefore _Ahasuerus_
and _Artaxerxes_ who succeed him, are _Xerxes_ and _Artaxerxes Longimanus_;
and the _Jews_ who came up from _Artaxerxes_ to _Jerusalem_, and began to
build the city and the wall, _Ezra_ iv. 13. are _Ezra_ with his companions:
which being understood, the history of the _Jews_ in the Reign of these
Kings will be as follows.

After the Temple was built, and _Darius Hystaspis_ was dead, the enemies of
the _Jews_ in the beginning of the Reign of his successor _Ahasuerus_ or
_Xerxes_, wrote unto him an accusation against them; _Ezra_ iv. 6. but in
the seventh year of his successor _Artaxerxes_, _Ezra_ and his companions
went up from _Babylon_ with Offerings and Vessels for the Temple, and power
to bestow on it out of the King's Treasure what should be requisite; _Ezra_
vii. whence the Temple is said to be finished, _according to the
commandment of _Cyrus_, and _Darius_, and _Artaxerxes_ King of _Persia__:
_Ezra_ vi. 14. Their commission was also to set Magistrates and Judges over
the land, and thereby becoming a new Body Politic, they called a great
Council or Sanhedrim to separate the people from strange wives; and they
were also encouraged to attempt the building of _Jerusalem_ with its wall:
and thence _Ezra_ saith in his prayer, that _God had extended mercy unto
them in the sight of the Kings of _Persia_, and given them a reviving to
set up the house of their God, and to repair the desolations thereof, and
to give them a WALL in _Judah_, even in _Jerusalem__. _Ezra_ ix. 9. But
when they had begun to repair the wall, their enemies wrote against them to
_Artaxerxes_: _Be it known_, say they, _unto the King, that the _Jews_
which came up from thee to us, are come unto _Jerusalem_, building the
rebellious and the bad city, and have set up the walls thereof, and joined
the foundations_, &c. And the King wrote back that the _Jews_ should cease
and the city not be built, until another commandment should be given from
him: whereupon their enemies _went up to _Jerusalem_, and made them cease
by force and power_; _Ezra_ iv. but in the twentieth year of the King,
_Nehemiah_ hearing that the _Jews_ were in great affliction and distress,
and that the wall of _Jerusalem_, that wall which had been newly repaired
by _Ezra_, _was broken down, and the gates thereof burnt wth fire_; he
obtained leave of the King to go and build the city, and the Governour's
house, _Nehem._ i. 3. & ii. 6, 8, 17. and coming to _Jerusalem_ the same
year, he continued Governor twelve years, and built the wall; and being
opposed by _Sanballat_, _Tobiah_ and _Geshem_, he persisted in the work
with great resolution and patience, until the breaches were made up: then
_Sanballat_ and _Geshem_ sent messengers unto him five times to hinder him
from setting up the doors upon the gates: but notwithstanding he persisted
in the work, until the doors were also set up: so the wall was finished in
the eight and twentieth year of the King, _Joseph._ _Antiq._ l. xi. c. 5.
in the five and twentieth day of the month _Elul_, or sixth month, in fifty
and two days after the breaches were made up, and they began to work upon
the gates. While the timber for the gates was preparing and seasoning, they
made up the breaches of the wall; both were works of time, and are not
jointly to be reckoned within the 52 days: this is the time of the last
work of the wall, the work of setting up the gates after the timber was
seasoned and the breaches made up. When he had set up the gates, he
dedicated the wall with great solemnity, and appointed Officers _over the
chambers for the Treasure, for the Offerings, for the First-Fruits, and for
the Tithes, to gather into them out of the fields of the cities, the
portions appointed by the law for the Priests and Levites; and the Singers
and the Porters kept the ward of their God_; Nehem. xii. _but the people in
the city were but few, and the houses were unbuilt_: _Nehem._ vii. 1, 4.
and in this condition he left _Jerusalem_ in the 32d year of the King; and
after sometime returning back from the King, he reformed such abuses as had
been committed in his absence. _Nehem._ xiii. In the mean time, the
Genealogies of the Priests and Levites were recorded in the book of the
_Chronicles_, in the days of _Eliashib_, _Joiada_, _Jonathan_, and
_Jaddua_, until the Reign of the next King _Darius Nothus_, whom _Nehemiah_
calls _Darius_ the _Persian_: _Nehem._ xii. 11, 22, 23. whence it follows
that _Nehemiah_ was Governor of the _Jews_ until the Reign of _Darius
Nothus_. And here ends the Sacred History of the _Jews_.

The histories of the _Persians_ now extant in the East, represent that the
oldest Dynasties of the Kings of _Persia_, were those whom they call
_Pischdadians_ and _Kaianides_, and that the Dynasty of the _Kaianides_
immediately succeeded that of the _Pischdadians_. They derive the name
_Kaianides_ from the word _Kai_, which, they say, in the old _Persian_
language signified a Giant or great King; and they call the first four
Kings of this Dynasty, _Kai-Cobad, Kai-Caus, Kai-Cosroes_, and _Lohorasp_,
and by _Lohorasp_ mean _Kai-Axeres_, or _Cyaxeres_: for they say that
_Lohorasp_ was the first of their Kings who reduced their armies to good
order and discipline, and _Herodotus_ affirms the same thing of _Cyaxeres_:
and they say further, that _Lohorasp_ went eastward, and conquered many
Provinces of _Persia_, and that one of his Generals, whom the _Hebrews_
call _Nebuchadnezzar_, the _Arabians_ _Bocktanassar_, and others _Raham_
and _Gudars_, went westward, and conquered all _Syria_ and _Judæa_, and
took the city of _Jerusalem_ and destroyed it: they seem to call
_Nebuchadnezzar_ the General of _Lohorasp_, because he assisted him in some
of his wars. The fifth King of this Dynasty, they call _Kischtasp_, and by
this name mean sometimes _Darius Medus_, and sometimes _Darius Hystaspis_:
for they say that he was contemporary to _Ozair_ or _Ezra_, and to
_Zaradust_ or _Zoroastres_, the Legislator of the _Ghebers_ or
fire-worshippers, and established his doctrines throughout all _Persia_;
and here they take him for _Darius Hystaspis_: they say also that he was
contemporary to _Jeremiah_, and to _Daniel_, and that he was the son and
successor of _Lohorasp_, and here they take him for _Darius_ the _Mede_.
The sixth King of the _Kaianides_, they call _Bahaman_, and tell us that
_Bahaman_ was _Ardschir Diraz_, that is _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, so called
from the great extent of his power: and yet they say that _Bahaman_ went
westward into _Mesopotamia_ and _Syria_, and conquered _Belshazzar_ the son
of _Nebuchadnezzar_, and gave the Kingdom to _Cyrus_ his Lieutenant-General
over _Media_: and here they take _Bahaman_ for _Darius Medus_. Next after
_Ardschir Diraz_, they place _Homai_ a Queen, the mother of _Darius
Nothus_, tho' really she did not Reign: and the two next and last Kings of
the _Kaianides_, they call _Darab_ the bastard son of _Ardschir Diraz_, and
_Darab_ who was conquered by _Ascander Roumi_, that is _Darius Nothus_, and
_Darius_ who was conquered by _Alexander_ the _Greek_: and the Kings
between these two _Darius's_ they omit, as they do also _Cyrus_,
_Cambyses_, and _Xerxes_. The Dynasty of the _Kaianides_, was therefore
that of the _Medes_ and _Persians_, beginning with the defection of the
_Medes_ from the _Assyrians_, in the end of the Reign of _Sennacherib_, and
ending with the conquest of _Persia_ by _Alexander_ the Great. But their
account of this Dynasty is very imperfect, some Kings being omitted, and
others being confounded with one another: and their Chronology of this
Dynasty is still worse; for to the first King they assign a Reign of 120
years, to the second a Reign of 150 years, to the third a Reign of 60
years, to the fourth a Reign of 120 years, to the fifth as much, and to the
sixth a Reign of 112 years.

This Dynasty being the Monarchy of the _Medes_, and _Persians_; the Dynasty
of the _Pischdadians_ which immediately preceded it, must be that of the
_Assyrians_: and according to the oriental historians this was the oldest
Kingdom in the world, some of its Kings living a thousand years a-piece,
and one of them Reigning five hundred years, another seven hundred years,
and another a thousand years.

We need not then wonder, that the _Egyptians_ have made the Kings in the
first Dynasty of their Monarchy, that which was seated at _Thebes_ in the
days of _David_, _Solomon_, and _Rehoboam_, so very ancient and so long
lived; since the _Persians_ have done the like to their Kings, who began to
Reign in _Assyria_ two hundred years after the death of _Solomon_; and the
_Syrians_ of _Damascus_ have done the like to their Kings _Adar_ and
_Hazael_, who Reigned an hundred years after the death of _Solomon_,
_worshipping them as Gods, and boasting their antiquity, and not knowing_,
saith _Josephus_, _that they were but modern_.

And whilst all these nations have magnified their Antiquities so
exceedingly, we need not wonder that the _Greeks_ and _Latines_ have made
their first Kings a little older than the truth.

       *       *       *       *       *

FINIS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Notes.

[1] _In the life of_ Lycurgus.

[2] In the life of _Solon_.

[3] Herod. l. 2.

[4] Plutarch. de Pythiæ Oraculo.

[5] Plutarch. in Solon

[6] Apud Diog. Laert. in Solon p. 10.

[7] Plin. nat. hist. l. 7. c. 56.

[8] Ib. l. 5. c. 29.

[9] Cont. Apion. sub initio.

[10] In Ακουσιλαος.

[11] Joseph. cont. Ap. l. 1.

[12] Dionys. l. 1. initio.

[13] Plutarch. in Numa.

[14] Diodor. l. 16. p. 550. Edit. Steph.

[15] Polyb. p. 379. B.

[16] In vita Lycurgi, sub initio.

[17] In Solone.

[18] Plutarch. in Romulo & Numa.

[19] In Æneid. 7. v. 678.

[20] Diodor. l. 1.

[21] Plutarch. in Romulo.

[22] Lib. I. in Proæm.

[23] Plutarch. in Lycurgo sub initio.

[24] Pausan. l. 4. c. 13. p. 28. & c. 7. p. 296 & l. 3. c. 15. p. 245.

[25] Pausan. l. 4. c. 7. p. 296.

[26] Herod. l. 7.

[27] Herod. l. 8.

[28] Plato in Minoe.

[29] Thucyd. l. 1. p. 13.

[30] Athen. l. 14 p. 605

[31] Pausan. l. 5. c. 8.

[32] Pausan. l. 6. c. 19.

[33] Plutarch. de Musica. Clemens Strom. l. 1. p. 308.

[34] Herod. l. 6. c. 52.

[35] Pausan. l. 5. c. 4.

[36] Pausan. l. 5. c. 1, 3, 8. Strabo, l. 8, p. 357.

[37] Pausan. l. 5. c.4.

[38] Pausan. l. 5. c.18.

[39] Solin. c. 30.

[40] Dionys. l. 1. p. 15.

[41] Apollon. Argonaut. l. 1. v. 101.

[42] Plutarch. in Theseo.

[43] Diodor. l. 1. p. 35.

[44] Joseph. Antiq. l. 4. c. 8

[45] Contra Apion. l. 1.

[46] Hygin. Fab. 144.

[47] Gen. i. 14. & viii. 22. Censorinus c. 19 & 20. Cicero in Verrem.
Geminus c. 6.

[48] Cicero in Verrem.

[49] Diodor. l. 1.

[50] Cicero in Verrem.

[51] Gem. c. 6.

[52] Apud Laertium, in Cleobulo.

[53] Apud Laertium, in Thalete. Plutarch. in Solone.

[54] Censorinus c. 18. Herod. l. 2. prope initium.

[55] Apollodor l. 3. p. 169. Strabo l. 16. p. 476. Homer. Odyss. Τ. v. 179.

[56] Herod. l. 1.

[57] Plutarch. in Numa.

[58] Diodor. l. 3. p. 133.

[59] Diodor. l. 1. p. 13.

[60] Apud Theodorum Gazam de mentibus.

[61] Apud Athenæum, l. 14.

[62] Suidas in Σαροι.

[63] Herod. l. 1.

[64] Julian. Or: 4.

[65] Strabo l. 17. p. 816.

[66] Diodor. l. 1. p. 32.

[67] Plutarch de Osiride & Iside. Diodor. l. 1. p. 9.

[68] Hecatæus apud Diodor. l. 1. p. 32.

[69] Isagoge Sect. 23, a Petavio edit.

[70] Hipparch. ad Phænom. l.2. Sect. 3. a Petavio edit.

[71] Hipparch. ad Phænom. l.1. Sect. 2.

[72] Strom. 1. p. 306, 352.

[73] Laertius Proem. l. 1.

[74] Apollodor. l. 1. c. 9. Sect. 16.

[75] Suidas in Αναγαλλις.

[76] Apollodor. l. 1. c. 9. Sect. 25.

[77] Laert. in Thalete. Plin. l. 2. c. 12.

[78] Plin. l. 18. c. 23.

[79] Petav. Var. Disl. l. 1. c. 5.

[80] Petav. Doct. Temp. l. 4. c. 26.

[81] Columel. l. 9. c. 14. Plin. l. 18. c. 25.

[82] Arrian. l. 7.

[83] In Moph.

[84] Euanthes apud Athenæum, l. 67. p. 296.

[85] Hyginus Fab. 14.

[86] Homer. Odyss. l. 8. v. 292.

[87] Hesiod. Theogon. v. 945.

[88] Pausan. l. 2. c. 23.

[89] Strabo l. 16.

[90] Isa. xxiii. 2. 12.

[91] 1 Kings v. 6

[92] Steph. in Azoth.

[93] Conon. Narrat. 37.

[94] Nonnus Dionysiac l. 13 v. 333 α sequ.

[95] Athen. l. 4. c. 23.

[96] Strabo. l. 10. p. 661. Herod. l. 1.

[97] Strabo. l. 16.

[98] 2 Chron. xxi. 8, 10. & 2 Kings. viii. 20, 22.

[99] Herod. l. 1. initio, & l. 7. circa medium.

[100] Solin. c. 23, Edit. Salm.

[101] Plin. l. 4. c. 22.

[102] Strabo. l. 9. p. 401. & l. 10. p. 447.

[103] Herod. l. 5.

[104] Strabo. l. 1. p. 42.

[105] Strabo. l. 1. p. 48.

[106] Bochart. Canaan. l. 1. c. 34.

[107] Strabo. l. 3. p. 140.

[108] Vid. Phil. Transact. Nº. 359.

[109] Canaan, l. 1. c. 34. p. 682.

[110] Aristot. de Mirab.

[111] Plin. l. 7. c. 56.

[112] Canaan. l. 1. c. 39.

[113] Philostratus in vita Apollonii l. 5. c. 1. apud Photium.

[114] Arnob. l. 1.

[115] Bochart. in Canaan. l. 1. c. 24.

[116] Oros. l. 5. c. 15. Florus l. 3. c. 1. Sallust. in Jugurtha.

[117] Antiq. l. 8. c. 2, 5. & l. 9. c. 14.

[118] Thucyd. l. 6. initio. Euseb. Chr.

[119] Thucyd. ib.

[120] Apud Dionys. l. 1. p. 15.

[121] Herod. l. 8. c. 137.

[122] Herod. l. 8.

[123] Herod. l. 8. c. 139.

[124] Thucyd. l. 2. prope finem.

[125] Herod l. 6. c. 127.

[126] Strabo. l. 8. p. 355.

[127] Pausan. l. 6. c. 22.

[128] Pausan. l. 5. c. 9.

[129] Strabo. l. 8. p. 358.

[130] Phanias Eph. ap. Plut. in vita Solonis.

[131] Vid. Dionys. Halicarnass. l. 1. p. 44, 45.

[132] Pausan. l. 2. c. 6.

[133] Hygin. Fab. 7 & 8.

[134] Homer. Iliad. Ο.

[135] Homer. Odys. Η. Diodor. l. 5. p.237.

[136] Diodor. l. 1. p.17.

[137] Pausan. l. 2. c. 25.

[138] Apollodor. l. 2. Sect. 5.

[139] Herod l. 7.

[140] Bochart. Canaan part. 2. cap. 13.

[141] Apollon. Argonaut. l. 1. v. 77.

[142] Conon. Narrat. 13.

[143] Pausan. l. 5. c. 1. Apollodor. l. 1. c. 7.

[144] Pausan. l. 7. c. 1.

[145] Pausan. l. 1. c. 37. & l. 10. c. 29.

[146] Pausan. l. 7. c. 1.

[147] Hesych. in Κραναος.

[148] Themist. Orat. 19.

[149] Plato in Alcib. 1.

[150] Pausan. l. 8. c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

[151] Pausan. l. 8. c. 4. Apollon. Argonaut. l. 1. v. 161.

[152] Pausan. l. 8. c. 4.

[153] Herod. l. 5. c. 58.

[154] Strabo l. 10. p. 464, 465, 466.

[155] Solin. Polyhist. c. 11.

[156] Isidor. originum. lib. xi. c. 6.

[157] Clem. Strom. l. 1.

[158] Pausan. l. 9. c. 11.

[159] Strabo l. 10. p. 472, 473. Diodor. l. 5. c. 4.

[160] Strabo l. 10. p. 468. 472. Diodor. l. 5. c. 4.

[161] Lucian de sacrificiis. Apollod. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 3. & c. 2. sect. 1.

[162] Boch. in Canaan. l. 1. c. 15.

[163] Athen. l. 13. p. 601.

[164] Plutarch in Theseo.

[165] Homer Il. Ν. & Ξ. & Odys. Λ. & Τ.

[166] Herod. l. 1.

[167] Apollod. l. 3. c. 1. Hygin. Fab. 40, 41, 42. 178.

[168] Lucian. de Dea Syria.

[169] Diodor. l. 5. c. 4,

[170] Argonaut. l. 2. v. 1236.

[171] Lucian. de sacrificiis.

[172] Porphyr. in vita Pythag.

[173] Cicero de Nat. Deor. l. 3.

[174] Callimac. Hymn 1. v. 8.

[175] Cypr. de Idolorum vanitate.

[176] Tert. Apologet. c. 10.

[177] Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 1. c. 7.

[178] Pausan. l. 5. c. 7, vid. et. c. 13. 14. & l. 8. c. 2.

[179] Pausan. l. 8. c. 29.

[180] Diodor. l. 5. p. 183.

[181] Pausan. l. 5. c. 8. 14.

[182] Herod. l. 2. c. 44.

[183] Cic. de natura Deorum. lib. 3.

[184] Diodor. p. 223.

[185] Dionys. l. 1. p. 38, 42.

[186] Lucian. de saltatione.

[187] Arnob. adv. gent. l. 6. p. 131.

[188] Herod. l. 2. initio.

[189] Diodor. l. 1. p. 8.

[190] Hesiod. opera. v. 108.

[191] Apollon. Argonaut. l. 4. v. 1643.

[192] Vita Homeri Herodoto adfer.

[193] Herod. l. 2.

[194] 1 Sam. ix. 16. & xiii. 5. 19, 20.

[195] Clem. Al. Strom. 1. p. 321.

[196] Plin. l. 7.

[197] Plato in Timæo.

[198] Apollodor. l. 3. c. 1.

[199] Herod. l. 2.

[200] Hygin. Fab. 7.

[201] Apollodor. l. 3. c. 6.

[202] Homer. Il. Γ. vers 572.

[203] Thucyd. l. 2. p. 110. & Plutarch. in Theseo.

[204] Strabo. l. 9. p. 396.

[205] Apud Strabonem, l. 9. p. 397.

[206] Pausan. l. 2. c. 15.

[207] Strabo. l. 8. p. 337.

[208] Pausan. l. 8. c. 1. 2.

[209] Plin. l. 7. c. 56.

[210] Dionys. l. 1. p. 10.

[211] Dionys. l. 2. p. 126.

[212] Diodor l. 5. p. 224. 225. 240.

[213] Ammian. l. 17. c. 7.

[214] Plin. l. 2. c. 87.

[215] Diodor. l. 5. p. 202. 204.

[216] Apud Diodor. l. 5. p. 201.

[217] Dionys. l. 1. p. 17.

[218] Dionys. l. 1. p. 33. 34.

[219] Dionys. ib.

[220] Ptol. Hephæst. l. 2.

[221] Dionys. l. 2. p. 34.

[222] Diodor. l. 5. p. 230.

[223] Ister apud Porphyr. abst. l. 2. s. 56.

[224] Bochart. Canaan. l. 1. c. 15.

[225] Apud Strabonem. lib. 14. p. 684.

[226] Strabo. l. 17. p. 828.

[227] Diodor. l. 3. p. 132.

[228] Herod. l. 1.

[229] 1 King. xx. 16.

[230] Genes. xiv. Deut ii. 9. 12. 19.-22.

[231] Exod. i. 9. 22.

[232] Job xxxi. 11.

[233] Job xxxi. 26.

[234] 1 Chron. xi. 4. 5. Judg. i. 21. 2 Sam v. 6.

[235] Vide Hermippum apud Athenæum, I.

[236] Argonaut. l. 4. v. 272.

[237] Diodor. l. 1. p. 7.

[238] Apud Diodorum l. 3. p. 140.

[239] Diodor. l. 3. p. 131. 132.

[240] Pausan. l. 2. c. 20. p. 155.

[241] Diodor. l. 3. p. 130 & Schol. Apollonii. l. 2.

[242] Ammian. l. 22. c. 8.

[243] Justin. l. 2. c. 4.

[244] Diodor. l. 1. p. 9.

[245] Apud Diodor. l. 3. p. 141.

[246] Step. in Αμμωνια.

[247] Plin. l. 6. c. 28.

[248] Ptol. l. 6. c. 7.

[249] D. Augustin. in exposit. epist. ad Rom. sub initio.

[250] Procop. de bello Vandal. l. 2. c. 10.

[251] Chron. l. 1. p. 11.

[252] Gemar. ad tit. Shebijth. cap. 6.

[253] Manetho apud Josephum cont. Appion. l. 1. p. 1039.

[254] Herod. l. 2.

[255] Jerem. xliv. 1. Ezek. xxix. 14.

[256] Menetho apud Porphyrium περι απονης** l. 1. Sect. 55. Et. Euseb.
Præp. l. 4. c. 16. p. 155.

[257] Diodor. l. 3. p. 101.

[258] Diodor. apud Photium in Biblioth.

[259] Herod. l. 2.

[260] Plutarch. de Iside. p. 355. Diodor. l. 1. p. 9.

[261] Augustin. de Civ. Dei. l. 18. c. 47.

[262] Apud Photium, c. 279.

[263] Fab. 274.

[264] Apud Euseb. Chron.

[265] Plin. l. 6. c. 23, 28. & l. 7. c. 56.

[266] Diodor. l. 1. p. 17.

[267] Pausan. l. 4. c. 23.

[268] Apollodor. l. 2. c. 1.

[269] Dionys. in Perie. v. 623.

[270] Fab. 275.

[271] Saturnal. l. 5. c. 21.

[272] Lucan. l. 10.

[273] Lucan. l. 9.

[274] Herod. l. 1.

[275] Diodor. l. 1. p. 35. Herod. l. 2 c. 102, 103, 106.

[276] Pausan. l. 10. Suidas in Παρνασιοι.

[277] Lucan l. 5.

[278] Argonaut. l. 4. v. 272.

[279] Herod. l. 2. c. 109.

[280] In vita Pythag. c. 29.

[281] Diodor. l. 1. p. 36

[282] Dionys. de situ Orbis.

[283] Diodor. l. 1. p. 39.

[284] Plutarch. de Iside & Osiride.

[285] Diodor. l. 1. p. 8.

[286] Lucian. de Dea Syria

[287] Exod. xxxiv. 13. Num. xxxiii. 52. Deut. vii. 5. & xii. 3.

[288] 2 Sam. viii. 10. & 1 King. xi. 23.

[289] Antiq l. 9. c. 2.

[290] Justin. l. 36.

[291] Diodor. l. 5. p. 238.

[292] Suidas in Σαρδαναπαλος.

[293] Apollod. l. 3.

[294] Argonaut. l. 4. v. 424. & l. 1. v. 621.

[295] Homer Odyss. Θ. v. 268. 292. & Hymn. 1. & 2. in Venerem. & Hesiod.
Theogon. v. 192.

[296] Pausan. l. 1. c. 20.

[297] Clem. Al. Admon. ad Gent. p. 10. Apollodor. l. 3. c. 13. Pindar.
Pyth. Ode 2. Hesych. in Κινυραδαι. Steph. in Αμαθους. Strabo. l. 16, p.
755.

[298] Clem. Al. Admon. ad Gent. p. 21. Plin. l. 7. c. 56.

[299] Herod. l. 2.

[300] Herod. l. 3. c. 37.

[301] Bochart. Canaan. l. 1. c. 4.

[302] Apud Athenæum l. 9. p. 392.

[303] Ptol. l. 2.

[304] Diod. l. 3. p. 145.

[305] Vas. Chron. Hisp. c. 10.

[306] Strabo l. 16. p. 776.

[307] Homer.

[308] Diodor. l. 3. p.132, 133

[309] Plato in Timæo. & Critia.

[310] Apud Diodor. l. 5. p. 233.

[311] Pamphus apud Pausan. l. 7. c. 21.

[312] Herod. l. 2. c. 50.

[313] Plutarch in Iside.

[314] Lucian de Saltatione.

[315] Agatharc. apud Photium.

[316] Hygin. Fab. 150.

[317] Plutarch. in Iside.

[318] Diodor. l. 1. p. 10.

[319] Pindar. Pyth. Ode 9.

[320] Diodor. l. 1. p. 12.

[321] Plin. l. 6. c. 29.

[322] Herod. l. 2. c. 110.

[323] Manetho apud Josephum cont. Apion. p. 1052, 1053.

[324] Diodor. l. 1. p. 31.

[325] Herod. l. 2.

[326] Strabo. l. 1. p. 48.

[327] Pindar. Pyth. Ode 4.

[328] Strabo. l. 1. p. 21, 45, 46.

[329] Diodor. l. 1. p. 29.

[330] Manetho

[331] Herod. l. 2

[332] Herod. l. 2.

[333] Ammian. l. 17. c. 4.

[334] Strabo. l. 17. p. 817.

[335] Annal. l. 2. c. 60.

[336] Diodor. l. 1. p. 32.

[337] Diodor. l. 1. p. 51.

[338] Joseph. Ant. l. 1. c. 4.

[339] Heordot. l. 2. c. 141.

[340] Isa. xix. 2, 4, 11, 13, 23.

[341] Herod. l. 2. c. 148, &c.

[342] Plin. l. 36. c. 8. 9.

[343] Diodor. l. 1 p. 29, &c.

[344] Diodor. l. 2, p. 83.

[345] Amos vi. 13, 14.

[346] Amos vi. 2.

[347] 2 Chron. xxvi. 6.

[348] 2 King. xiv. 25.

[349] 2 King. xix. 11.

[350] Isa. x. 8.

[351] 1 Chron. v. 26. 2 King. xvi. 9 & xvii. 6, 24. & Ezra iv. 9.

[352] Isa. xxii. 6.

[353] 2 King. xvii. 24, 30, 31. & xviii. 33, 34, 35. 2 Chron. xxxii. 15.

[354] 2 Chron. xxxii. 13, 15.

[355] Hosea v. 13. & x. 6, 14.

[356] Herod. l. iii. c. 155.

[357] Herod. l. i. c. 184.

[358] Beros. apud Josep. contr. Appion. l. 1.

[359] Curt. l. 5. c. 1.

[360] Apud Euseb. Præp. l. 9. c. 41.

[361] Doroth. apud Julium Firmicum.

[362] Heren. apud Steph. in Βαβ.

[363] Abyden apud Euseb. Præp. l. 9. c. 41.

[364] Isa. xxiii. 13.

[365] Tobit. i. 13. Annal. Tyr. apud Joseph. Ant. l. 9. c. 14.

[366] Hosea x. 14.

[367] Tobit. i. 15.

[368] Tobit. i. 21. 2 King. xix. 37. Ptol. Canon.

[369] Isa. xx. 1, 3, 4.

[370] Herod. l. 1. c. 72. & l. 7. c. 63.

[371] Apud Athenæum l. xii. p. 528.

[372] Herod. l. 1. c. 96. &c.

[373] Athenæus l. 12. p. 529, 530.

[374] Herod. l. 1. c. 102.

[375] Herod. l. 1. c. 103. Steph. in Παρθυαιοι.

[376] Alexander Polyhist. apud Euseb. in Chron. p. 46 & apud Syncellum. p.
210.

[377] 2 Kings xxiv. 7. Jer. xlvi. 2. Eupolemus apud Euseb. Præp. l. 9. c.
35.

[378] 2 King. xxiii. 29, &c.

[379] Eupolemus apud Euseb. Præp. l. 9. c. 39. 2 King. xxv. 2, 7.

[380] Dan. i. 1.

[381] Dan. i. 2. 2 Chron. xxxvi. 6.

[382] Jer. xlvi. 2.

[383] Apud Joseph. Antiq. l. 10. c. 11.

[384] Beros. apud Joseph. Ant. l. 10. c. 11.

[385] 2 King. xxiv. 12, 14. 2 Chron. xxxvi. 10.

[386] 2 Kings xxiv. 17. Ezek. xvii. 13, 16, 18.

[387] Ezek. xvii. 15.

[388] 2 King. xxv. 1, 2, 8. Jer. xxxii. 1, & xxxix 1, 2.

[389] Canon. & Beros.

[390] 2 King. xxv. 27.

[391] Hieron. in Isa. xiv. 19.

[392] 2 King. xxv. 27. 29, &c.

[393] Dan. v. 2.

[394] Jos. Ant. l. 10. c. 11.

[395] Herod. l. 1. c. 184, 185.

[396] Philost. in vita Apollonii. l. 1. c. 15.

[397] Jos. cont. Apion. l. 1. c. 21.

[398] Herod. l. 1. c. 189, 190, 191. Xenoph. l. 7. p. 190, 191, 192. Ed.
Paris.

[399] Dan. v. 30, 31. Joseph. Ant. l. 10. c. 11.

[400] Æsch. Persæ v. 761.

[401] Herod. l. 1. c. 107, 108. Xenophon Cyropæd. l. 1. p. 3.

[402] Cyropæd. l. 1. p. 22.

[403] Cyropæd. l. viii. p. 228, 229.

[404] Herod. l. 1. c. 73.

[405] Herod. l. 1. c. 106, 130.

[406] Herod. l. 1. c. 103.

[407] Herod. ib.

[408] Jer. xxv.

[409] Herod. l. 1. c. 73, 74.

[410] Herod. Ibid. Plin. l. 2. c. 12.

[411] _The _Scythians_._

[412] Jer. xxvii. 3, 6. Ezek. xxi. 19, 20 & xxv. 2, 8, 12.

[413] Ezek. xxvi. 2. & xxix. 17, 19.

[414] Ezek. xxix. 19. & xxx. 4, 5.

[415] Suid. in Δαρεικος & Δαρεικους. Harpocr. in Δαρεικος. Scoliast in
Aristophanis. Εκκλησιαζουστον. v. 598.

[416] Herod. l. 1. c. 71.

[417] Isa. xiii. 17.

[418] Plin. l. 33. c. 3.

[419] Herod. l. 1. c. 94.

[420] Theogn. Γνωμαι, v. 761.

[421] Ibid. v. 773.

[422] Cyrop. l. 8.

[423] Comment. in Dan. v.

[424] Strabo. l. 16. initio.

[425] Strab. l. 16. p. 745.

[426] Herod. l. 1. c. 192.

[427] Herod. l. 1. c. 178, &c.

[428] Isa. xxiii. 13.

[429] Diod. l. 1. p. 51.

[430] Herod. l. 1. c. 181.

[431] Suidas in Αρισταρχος. Herod. l. 1. c. 123, &c.

[432] Strabo. l. 15. p. 730.

[433] Herod. l. 1. c. 127, &c.

[434] Cyrop. l. 8. p. 233.

[435] See Plate I. & II.

[436] Ezek. xli. 13, 14.

[437] Ezek. xl. 47

[438] Ezek. xl. 29, 33, 36.

[439] Ezek. xl. 19, 23, 27. 2 King xxi. 5. 2 Chron. iv. 9.

[440] Ezek. xl. 15, 17, 21. 1 Chron. xxviii. 12.

[441] Ezek. xl 5, xlii. 20, & xlv. 2.

[442] 2 King. xxi.5.

[443] Ezek. xl.

[444] Plate III.

[445] Plate I.

[446] 1 Chron. xxvi. 17.

[447] Ezek. xlvi. 8, 9.

[448] Ezek. xliv. 2, 3.

[449] 1 Chron. xxvi. 15, 16, 17, 18.

[450] Ezek. xl. 22, 26, 31, 34, 37.

[451] Plate II & III.

[452] 1 King. vi. 36. & vii. 13. Ezek. xl. 17, 18.

[453] Ezek. xl. 10, 31, 34, 37.

[454] Plate I.

[455] 1 King. vi. 36, & vii. 12.

[456] Ezek. xl. 17.

[457] Plate III.

[458] Plate I & II.

[459] Ezek. xlvi. 21, 22.

[460] Ezek. xl. 45.

[461] Ezek. xl. 39, 41, 42, 46.

[462] Plate II.

[463] Ezek. xlii. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 13, 14.

[464] Ezek. xlvi. 19, 20.

[465] Ezek. xlii. 5, 6.

[466] 1 King. vi. 2. Ezek. xli. 2, 4, 12, 13, 14.

[467] 1 King. vi. 3. Ezek. xli. 13.

[468] Ezek. xli. 6, 11.

[469] 1 King. vi. 6.

[470] Ezek. xli. 6.

[471] 2 Chron. iii. 4.

[472] 1 King. vi. 8.

[473] 2 Chron. xx. 5.

[474] 2 King. xvi. 18.

[475] Ezra vi. 3, 4.

[476] Plate I

[477] Plate III.

[478] Plate I.

[479] Valer. Max. l. 9. c. 2.

[480] Porph. de Abstinentia, lib. 4.

[481] Q. Curt. Lib. iii. c. 3.

[482] Suidas in Ζωροαστρης.

[483] Ammian. l. 23. c. 6.

[484] Euseb. Præp. Evang. l. 1. c. ult.

[485] Æsch. Persæ v. 763.

[486] Apud. Hieron in Dan. viii.




End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms
Amended, by Isaac Newton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHRONOLOGY OF ANCIENT ***

***** This file should be named 15784-0.txt or 15784-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/7/8/15784/

Produced by Robert Shimmin, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Observations upon the Prophecies of Daniel,
and the Apocalypse of St. John, by Isaac Newton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Observations upon the Prophecies of Daniel, and the Apocalypse of St. John

Author: Isaac Newton

Release Date: October 15, 2005 [EBook #16878]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OBSERVATIONS UPON THE ***




Produced by Greg Alethoup, Robert Shimmin, Keith Edkins
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





OBSERVATIONS
UPON THE
PROPHECIES
OF
_DANIEL_,
AND THE
APOCALYPSE
OF
St. _JOHN_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In Two PARTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

By Sir _ISAAC NEWTON_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_LONDON,_

Printed by J. DARBY and T. BROWNE in _Bartholomew-Close._

And Sold by J. ROBERTS in _Warwick-lane_, J. TONSON in the
_Strand_, W. INNYS and R. MANBY at the West End of St.
_Paul's Church-Yard_, J. OSBORN and T. LONGMAN in _Pater-Noster-Row_,
J. NOON near _Mercers Chapel_ in _Cheapside_,
T. HATCHETT at the _Royal Exchange_, S. HARDING in St.
_Martin's lane_, J. STAGG in _Westminster-Hall_, J. PARKER in
_Pall-mall_, and J. BRINDLEY in _New Bond-Street_.

M.DCC.XXXIII.

       *       *       *       *       *

To the Right Honourable

_P E T E R_

Lord _K I N G_,

Baron of _Ockham_, Lord High Chancellor of _Great-Britain._

My Lord,

_I shall make no Apology for addressing the following Sheets to Your
Lordship, who lived in a long Intercourse of Friendship with the Author;
and, like him, amidst occupations of a different nature, made Religion your
voluntary Study; and in all your Enquiries and Actions, have shewn the same
inflexible Adherence to Truth and Virtue._

_I shall always reckon it one of the Advantages of my Relation to Sir
_Isaac Newton_, that it affords me an opportunity of making this publick
acknowledgment of the unfeigned Respect of_,

  My Lord,
      Your Lordship's
          most obedient, and
              most humble Servant,
                  Benj. Smith.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.

PART I.

Observations upon the Prophecies of _Daniel_.

CHAP. I. Introduction concerning, the Compilers of the Books of the Old
Testament.

CHAP. II. Of the Prophetic Language.

CHAP. III. Of the vision of the Image composed of four Metals.

CHAP. IV. Of the vision of the four Beasts.

CHAP. V. Of the Kingdoms represented by the feet of the Image composed of
iron and clay.

CHAP. VI. Of the ten Kingdoms represented by the ten horns of the fourth
Beast.

CHAP. VII. Of the eleventh horn of _Daniel_'s fourth Beast.

CHAP. VIII. Of the power of the eleventh horn of _Daniel_'s fourth Beast,
to change times and laws.

CHAP. IX. Of the Kingdoms represented in _Daniel_ by the Ram and He-Goat.

CHAP. X. Of the Prophecy of the Seventy Weeks.

CHAP. XI. Of the Times of the Birth and Passion of Christ.

CHAP. XII. Of the Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth.

CHAP. XIII. Of the King who did according to his will, and magnified
himself above every God, and honoured _Mahuzzims_, and regarded not the
desire of women.

CHAP. XIV. Of the _Mahuzzims_, honoured by the King who doth according to
his will.

PART II.

Observations upon the _Apocalypse_ of St. _John_.

CHAP. I. Introduction, concerning the time when the _Apocalypse_ was
written.

CHAP. II. Of the relation which the _Apocalypse_ of _John_ hath to the Book
of the Law of _Moses_, and to the worship of God in the Temple.

CHAP. III. Of the relation which the Prophecy of _John_ hath to those of
_Daniel_; and of the Subject of the Prophecy.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART I.

       *       *       *       *       *

OBSERVATIONS
UPON THE
PROPHECIES
OF
_DANIEL._

       *       *       *       *       *

OBSERVATIONS

UPON THE

Prophecies of _DANIEL_

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. I.

_Introduction concerning the Compilers of the books of the Old Testament._

When _Manasses_ [1] set up a carved image in the house of the Lord, and
built altars in the two courts of the house, to all the host of Heaven, and
us'd inchantments and witchcraft, and familiar spirits, and for his great
wickedness was invaded by the army of _Asserhadon_ King of _Assyria_, and
carried captive to _Babylon_; the book of the Law was lost till the
eighteenth year of his grandson _Josiah_. Then [2] _Hilkiah_ the High
Priest, upon repairing the Temple, found it there: and the King lamented
that their fathers had not done after the words of the book, and commanded
that it should be read to the people, and caused the people to renew the
holy covenant with God. This is the book of the Law now extant.

When [3] _Shishak_ came out of _Egypt_ and spoil'd the temple, and brought
_Judah_ into subjection to the monarchy of _Egypt_, (which was in the fifth
year of _Rehoboam_) the _Jews_ continued under great troubles for about
twenty years; being _without the true God, and without a teaching Priest,
and without Law: and in those times there was no peace to him that went
out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the
inhabitants of the countries, and nation was destroyed of nation, and city
of city, for God did vex them with all adversity_. But [4] when _Shishak_
was dead, and _Egypt_ fell into troubles, _Judah_ had quiet ten years; and
in that time _Asa_ built fenced cities in _Judah_, and got up an army of
580000 men, with which, in the 15th year of his reign, he met and overcame
_Zerah_ the _Ethiopian_, who had conquered _Egypt_ and _Lybia_, and
_Troglodytica_, and came out with an army of 1000000 _Lybians_ and
_Ethiopians_, to recover the countries conquered by _Sesac_. And after this
victory [5] _Asa_ dethroned his mother for idolatry, and he renewed the
Altar, and brought new vessels of gold and silver into the Temple; and he
and the people entered into a new covenant to seek the Lord God of their
fathers, upon pain of death to those who worshiped other Gods; and his son
_Jehosaphat_ took away the high places, and in the third year of his reign
sent some of his Princes, and of the Priests and Levites, to teach in the
cities of _Judah_: and they had the book of the Law with them, and went
about throughout all the cities of _Judah_, and taught the people. This is
that book of the Law which was afterwards lost in the reign of _Manasses_,
and found again in the reign of _Josiah_, and therefore it was written
before the third year of _Jehosaphat_.

The same book of the Law was preserved and handed down to posterity by the
_Samaritans_, and therefore was received by the ten Tribes before their
captivity. For [6] when the ten Tribes were captivated, a Priest or the
captivity was sent back to _Bethel_, by order of the King of _Assyria_, to
instruct the new inhabitants of _Samaria_, in _the manner of the God of the
land_; and the _Samaritans_ had the _Pentateuch_ from this Priest, as
containing the law or _manner of the God of the land_, which he was to
teach them. For [7] they persevered in the religion which he taught them,
joining with it the worship of their own Gods; and by persevering in what
they had been taught, they preserved this book of their Law in the original
character of the _Hebrews_, while the two Tribes, after their return from
_Babylon_, changed the character to that of the _Chaldees_, which they had
learned at _Babylon_.

And since the _Pentateuch_ was received as the book of the Law, both by the
two Tribes and by the ten Tribes, it follows that they received it before
they became divided into two Kingdoms. For after the division, they
received not laws from one another, but continued at variance. _Judah_
could not reclaim _Israel_ from the sin of _Jeroboam_, and _Israel_ could
not bring _Judah_ to it. The _Pentateuch_ therefore was the book of the Law
in the days of _David_ and _Solomon_. The affairs of the Tabernacle and
Temple were ordered by _David_ and _Solomon_, according to the Law of this
book; and _David_ in the 78th Psalm, admonishing the people to give ear to
the Law of God, means the Law of this book. For in describing how their
forefathers kept it not, he quotes many historical things out of the books
of _Exodus_ and _Numbers_.

The race of the Kings of _Edom_, before there reigned any King over
_Israel_, is set down in the book of [8] _Genesis_; and therefore that book
was not written entirely in the form now extant, before the reign of
_Saul_. The writer set down the race of those Kings till his own time, and
therefore wrote before _David_ conquered _Edom_. The _Pentateuch_ is
composed of the Law and the history of God's people together; and the
history hath been collected from several books, such as were the history of
the Creation composed by _Moses_, _Gen_. ii. 4. the book of the generations
of _Adam_, _Gen._ v. i. and the book of the wars of the Lord, _Num._ xxi.
14. This book of wars contained what was done at the Red-sea, and in the
journeying of _Israel_ thro' the Wilderness, and therefore was begun by
_Moses_. And _Joshua_ might carry it on to the conquest of _Canaan_. For
_Joshua_ wrote some things in the book of the Law of God, _Josh._ xxiv. 26
and therefore might write his own wars in the book of wars, those being the
principal wars of God. These were publick books, and therefore not written
without the authority of _Moses_ and _Joshua_. And _Samuel_ had leisure in
the reign of _Saul_, to put them into the form of the books of _Moses_ and
_Joshua_ now extant, inserting into the book of _Genesis_, the race of the
Kings of _Edom_, until there reigned a King in _Israel_.

The book of the _Judges_ is a continued history of the _Judges_ down to the
death of _Sampson_, and therefore was compiled after his death, out of the
Acts of the _Judges_. Several things in this book are said to be done _when
there was no King in _Israel__, _Judg._ xvii. 6. xviii. 1. xix. 1. xxi. 25.
and therefore this book was written after the beginning of the reign of
_Saul_. When it was written, the _Jebusites_ dwelt in _Jerusalem_, _Jud._
i. 21 and therefore it was written before the eighth year of _David_, 2
_Sam._ v. 8. and 1 _Chron._ xi. 6. The books of _Moses_, _Joshua_, and
_Judges_, contain one continued history, down from the Creation to the
death of _Sampson_. Where the _Pentateuch_ ends, the book of _Joshua_
begins; and where the book of _Joshua_ ends, the book of _Judges_ begins.
Therefore all these books have been composed out of the writings of
_Moses_, _Joshua_, and other records, by one and the same hand, after the
beginning of the reign of _Saul_, and before the eighth year of _David_.
And _Samuel_ was a sacred writer, 1 _Sam._ x. 25. acquainted with the
history of _Moses_ and the _Judges_, 1 _Sam._ xii. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and
had leisure in the reign of _Saul_, and sufficient authority to compose
these books. He was a Prophet, and judged _Israel_ all the days of his
life, and was in the greatest esteem with the people; and the Law by which
he was to judge the people was not to be published by less authority than
his own, the Law-maker being not inferior to the judge. And the book of
_Jasher_, which is quoted in the book of _Joshua_, _Josh._ x. 13. was in
being at the death of _Saul_, 2 _Sam._ i. 18.

At the dedication of the Temple of _Solomon_, when the Ark was brought into
the most holy place, there was nothing in it but the two tables, 1 _Kings_
viii. 9. and therefore when the _Philistines_ took the Ark, they took out
of it the book of the Law, and the golden pot of Manna, and _Aaron_'s Rod.
And this and other losses in the desolation of _Israel_, by the conquering
_Philistines_, might give occasion to _Samuel_, after some respite from
those enemies, to recollect the scattered writings of _Moses_ and _Joshua_,
and the records of the Patriarchs and Judges, and compose them in the form
now extant.

The book of _Ruth_ is a history of things done in the days of the _Judges_,
and may be looked upon as an addition to the book of the _Judges_, written
by the same author, and at the same time. For it was written after the
birth of _David_, _Ruth_ iv. 17, 22. and not long after, because the
history of _Boaz_ and _Ruth_, the great grandfather and great grandmother
of _David_, and that of their contemporaries, could not well be remembered
above two or three generations. And since this book derives the genealogy
of _David_ from _Boaz_ and _Ruth_, and omits _David_'s elder brothers and
his sons; it was written in honour of _David_, after he was anointed King
by _Samuel_, and before he had children in _Hebron_, and by consequence in
the reign of _Saul_. It proceeds not to the history of _David_, and
therefore seems to have been written presently after he was anointed. They
judge well therefore who ascribe to _Samuel_ the books of _Joshua_,
_Judges_, and _Ruth_.

_Samuel_ is also reputed the author of the first book of _Samuel_, till the
time of his death. The two books of _Samuel_ cite no authors, and therefore
seem to be originals. They begin with his genealogy, birth and education,
and might be written partly in his lifetime by himself or his disciples the
Prophets at _Naioth_ in _Ramah_, 1 _Sam._ xix. 18, 19, 20. and partly after
his death by the same disciples.

The books of the _Kings_ cite other authors, as the book of the Acts of
_Solomon_, the book of the _Chronicles_ of the Kings of _Israel_, and the
book of the _Chronicles_ of the Kings of _Judah_. The books of the
_Chronicles_ cite the book of _Samuel_ the Seer, the book of _Nathan_ the
Prophet, and the book of _Gad_ the Seer, for the Acts of _David_; the book
of _Nathan_ the Prophet, the Prophecy of _Ahijah_ the _Shilonite_, and the
visions of _Iddo_ the Seer, for the Acts of _Solomon_; the book of
_Shemajah_ the Prophet, and the book of _Iddo_ the Seer concerning
genealogies, for the Acts of _Rehoboam_ and _Abijah_; the book of the Kings
of _Judah_ and _Israel_ for the Acts of _Asa_, _Joash_, _Amaziah_,
_Jotham_, _Ahaz_, _Hezekiah_, _Manasseh_, and _Josiah_; the book of
_Hanani_ the Seer, for the Acts of _Jehosaphat_; and the visions of
_Isaiah_ for the Acts of _Uzziah_ and _Hezekiah_. These books were
therefore collected out of the historical writings of the antient Seers and
Prophets. And because the books of the _Kings_ and _Chronicles_ quote one
another, they were written at one and the same time. And this time was
after the return from the _Babylonian_ captivity, because they bring down
the history of _Judah_, and the genealogies of the Kings of _Judah_, and of
the High Priests, to that captivity. The book of _Ezra_ was originally a
part of the book of the _Chronicles_, and has been divided from it. For it
begins with the two last verses of the books of _Chronicles_, and the first
book of _Esdras_ begins with the two last chapters thereof. _Ezra_ was
therefore the compiler of the books of _Kings_ and _Chronicles_, and
brought down the history to his own time. He was a ready Scribe in the Law
of God; and for assisting him in this work _Nehemias_ founded a library,
and _gathered together the Acts of the Kings and the Prophets, and of
_David_, and the Epistles of the Kings, concerning the holy gifts_, 2
_Maccab._ ii. 13. By the Acts of _David_ I understand here the two books of
_Samuel_, or at least the second book. Out of the Acts of the _Kings_,
written from time to time by the Prophets, he compos'd the books of the
Kings of _Judah_ and _Israel_, the _Chronicles_ of the Kings of _Judah_,
and the _Chronicles_ of the Kings of _Israel_. And in doing this he joined
those Acts together, in due order of time, copying the very words of the
authors, as is manifest from hence, that the books of the _Kings_ and
_Chronicles_ frequently agree with one another in words for many sentences
together. Where they agree in sense, there they agree in words also.

So the Prophecies of _Isaiah_, written at several times, he has collected
into one body. And the like he did for those of _Jeremiah_, and the rest of
the Prophets, down to the days of the second Temple. The book of _Jonah_ is
the history of _Jonah_ written by another hand. The book of _Daniel_ is a
collection of papers written at several times. The six last chapters
contain Prophecies written at several times by _Daniel_ himself: the six
first are a collection of historical papers written by others. The fourth
chapter is a decree of _Nebuchadnezzar_. The first chapter was written
after _Daniel_'s death: for the author saith, that _Daniel_ continued to
the first year of _Cyrus_; that is, to his first year over the _Persians_
and _Medes_, and third year over _Babylon_. And, for the same reason, the
fifth and sixth chapters were also written after his death. For they end
with these words: _So this _Daniel_ prospered in the reign of _Darius_ and
in the reign of _Cyrus_ the_ Persian. Yet these words might be added by the
collector of the papers, whom I take to be _Ezra_.

The Psalms composed by _Moses_, _David_, and others, seem to have been also
collected by _Ezra_ into one volume. I reckon him the collector, because in
this collection I meet with Psalms as late as the _Babylonian_ captivity,
but with none later.

After these things _Antiochus Epiphanes_ spoiled the Temple, commanded the
_Jews_ to forsake the Law upon pain of death, and caused the sacred books
to be burnt wherever they could be found: and in these troubles the book of
the _Chronicles_ of the Kings of _Israel_ was entirely lost. But upon
recovering from this oppression, _Judas Maccabæus_ gathered together all
those writings that were to be met with, 2 _Maccab._ ii. 14. and in
reducing them into order, part of the Prophecies of _Isaiah_, or some other
Prophet, have been added to the end of the Prophecies of _Zechariah_; and
the book of _Ezra_ has been separated from the book of _Chronicles_, and
set together in two different orders; in one order in the book of _Ezra_,
received into the Canon, and in another order in the first book of
_Esdras_.

After the _Roman_ captivity, the _Jews_ for preserving their traditions,
put them in writing in their _Talmud_, and for preserving their scriptures,
agreed upon an Edition, and pointed it, and counted the letters of every
sort in every book: and by preserving only this Edition, the antienter
various lections, except what can be discovered by means of the
_Septuagint_ Version, are now lost; and such marginal notes, or other
corruptions, as by the errors of the transcribers, before this Edition was
made, had crept into the text, are now scarce to be corrected.

The _Jews_ before the _Roman_ captivity, distinguished the sacred books
into the Law, the Prophets, and the _Hagiographa_, or holy writings; and
read only the Law and the Prophets in their Synagogues. And Christ and his
Apostles laid the stress of religion upon the Law and the Prophets, _Matt._
vii. 12. xxii. 4. _Luke_ xvi. 16, 29, 31. xxiv. 44. _Acts_ xxiv. 14. xxvi.
22. _Rom._ iii. 21. By the _Hagiographa_ they meant the historical books
called _Joshua_, _Judges_, _Ruth_, _Samuel_, _Kings_, _Chronicles_, _Ezra_,
_Nehemiah_, and _Esther_, the book of _Job_, the _Psalms_, the books of
_Solomon_, and the _Lamentations_. The Samaritans read only the
_Pentateuch_: and when _Jehosaphat_ sent men to teach in the cities, they
had with them only the book of the Law; for the Prophecies now extant were
not then written. And upon the return from the _Babylonian_ captivity,
_Ezra_ read only the book of the Law to the people, from morning to noon on
the first day of the seventh month; and from day to day in the feast of
Tabernacles: for he had not yet collected the writings of the Prophets into
the volume now extant; but instituted the reading of them after the
collection was made. By reading the Law and the Prophets in the Synagogues,
those books have been kept freer from corruption than the _Hagiographa_.

In the infancy of the nation of _Israel_, when God had given them a Law,
and made a covenant with them to be their God if they would keep his
commandments, he sent Prophets to reclaim them, as often as they revolted
to the worship of other Gods: and upon their returning to him, they
sometimes renewed the covenant which they had broken. These Prophets he
continued to send, till the days of _Ezra_: but after their Prophecies were
read in the Synagogues, those Prophecies were thought sufficient. For if
the people would not hear _Moses_ and the old Prophets, they would hear no
new ones, no not _tho they should rise from the dead_. At length when a new
truth was to be preached to the _Gentiles_, namely, _that Jesus was the
Christ_, God sent new Prophets and Teachers: but after their writings were
also received and read in the Synagogues of the Christians, Prophecy ceased
a second time. We have _Moses_, the Prophets, and Apostles, and the words
of Christ himself; and if we will not hear them, we shall be more
inexcusable than the _Jews._ For the Prophets and Apostles have foretold,
that as _Israel_ often revolted and brake the covenant, and upon repentance
renewed it; so there should be a falling away among the Christians, soon
after the days of the Apostles; and that in the latter days God would
destroy the impenitent revolters, and make a new covenant with his people.
And the giving ear to the Prophets is a fundamental character of the true
Church. For God has so ordered the Prophecies, that in the latter days _the
wise may understand, but the wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the
wicked shall understand_, Dan. xii. 9, 10. The authority of Emperors,
Kings, and Princes, is human. The authority of Councils, Synods, Bishops,
and Presbyters, is human. The authority of the Prophets is divine, and
comprehends the sum of religion, reckoning _Moses_ and the Apostles among
the Prophets; and _if an Angel from Heaven preach any other gospel_, than
what they have delivered, _let him be accursed_. Their writings contain the
covenant between God and his people, with instructions for keeping this
covenant; instances of God's judgments upon them that break it: and
predictions of things to come. While the people of God keep the covenant,
they continue to be his people: when they break it they cease to be his
people or church, and become _the Synagogue of Satan, who say they are
_Jews_ and are not._ And no power on earth is authorized to alter this
covenant.

The predictions of things to come relate to the state of the Church in all
ages: and amongst the old Prophets, _Daniel_ is most distinct in order of
time, and easiest to be understood: and therefore in those things which
relate to the last times, he must be made the key to the rest.

Notes to Chap. I.

[1] 2 Chron. xxxiii. 5, 6, 7.

[2] 2 Chron. xxxiv.

[3] 2 Chron. xii. 2, 3, 4, 8, 9. & xv. 3, 5, 6.

[4] 2 Chron. xiv. 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12.

[5] 2 Chron. xv. 3, 12, 13, 16, 18.

[6] 2 Kings xvii. 27, 28, 32, 33.

[7] 2 Kings xvii. 34, 41.

[8] Gen. xxxvi. 31.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. II.

_Of the Prophetic Language._

For understanding the Prophecies, we are, in the first place, to acquaint
our-selves with the figurative language of the Prophets. This language is
taken from the analogy between the world natural, and an empire or kingdom
considered as a world politic.

Accordingly, the whole world natural consisting of heaven and earth,
signifies the whole world politic, consisting of thrones and people, or so
much of it as is considered in the Prophecy: and the things in that world
signify the analogous things in this. For the heavens, and the things
therein, signify thrones and dignities, and those who enjoy them; and the
earth, with the things thereon, the inferior people; and the lowest parts
of the earth, called _Hades_ or Hell, the lowest or most miserable part of
them. Whence ascending towards heaven, and descending to the earth, are put
for rising and falling in power and honour: rising out of the earth, or
waters, and falling into them, for the rising up to any dignity or
dominion, out of the inferior state of the people, or falling down from the
same into that inferior state; descending into the lower parts of the
earth, for descending to a very low and unhappy estate; speaking with a
faint voice out of the dust, for being in a weak and low condition; moving
from one place to another, for translation from one office, dignity, or
dominion, to another; great earthquakes, and the shaking of heaven and
earth, for the shaking of kingdoms, so as to distract or overthrow them;
the creating a new heaven and earth, and the passing away of an old one, or
the beginning and end of the world, for the rise and ruin of the body
politic signified thereby.

In the heavens, the Sun and Moon are, by interpreters of dreams, put for
the persons of Kings and Queens; but in sacred Prophecy, which regards not
single persons, the Sun is put for the whole species and race of Kings, in
the kingdom or kingdoms of the world politic, shining with regal power and
glory; the Moon for the body of the common people, considered as the King's
wife; the Stars for subordinate Princes and great men, or for Bishops and
Rulers of the people of God, when the Sun is Christ; light for the glory,
truth, and knowledge, wherewith great and good men shine and illuminate
others; darkness for obscurity of condition, and for error, blindness and
ignorance; darkning, smiting, or setting of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, for
the ceasing of a kingdom, or for the desolation thereof, proportional to
the darkness; darkning the Sun, turning the Moon into blood, and falling of
the Stars, for the same; new Moons, for the return of a dispersed people
into a body politic or ecclesiastic.

Fire and meteors refer to both heaven and earth, and signify as follows;
burning any thing with fire, is put for the consuming thereof by war; a
conflagration of the earth, or turning a country into a lake of fire, for
the consumption of a kingdom by war; the being in a furnace, for the being
in slavery under another nation; the ascending up of the smoke of any
burning thing for ever and ever, for the continuation of a conquered people
under the misery of perpetual subjection and slavery; the scorching heat of
the sun, for vexatious wars, persecutions and troubles inflicted by the
King; riding on the clouds, for reigning over much people; covering the sun
with a cloud, or with smoke, for oppression of the King by the armies of an
enemy; tempestuous winds, or the motion of clouds, for wars; thunder, or
the voice of a cloud, for the voice of a multitude; a storm of thunder,
lightning, hail, and overflowing rain, for a tempest of war descending from
the heavens and clouds politic, on the heads of their enemies; rain, if not
immoderate, and dew, and living water, for the graces and doctrines of the
Spirit; and the defect of rain, for spiritual barrenness.

In the earth, the dry land and congregated waters, as a sea, a river, a
flood, are put for the people of several regions, nations, and dominions;
embittering of waters, for great affliction of the people by war and
persecution; turning things into blood, for the mystical death of bodies
politic, that is, for their dissolution; the overflowing of a sea or river,
for the invasion of the earth politic, by the people of the waters; drying
up of waters, for the conquest of their regions by the earth; fountains of
waters for cities, the permanent heads of rivers politic; mountains and
islands, for the cities of the earth and sea politic, with the territories
and dominions belonging to those cities; dens and rocks of mountains, for
the temples of cities; the hiding of men in those dens and rocks, for the
shutting up of Idols in their temples; houses and ships, for families,
assemblies, and towns, in the earth and sea politic; and a navy of ships of
war, for an army of that kingdom that is signified by the sea.

Animals also and vegetables are put for the people of several regions and
conditions; and particularly, trees, herbs, and land animals, for the
people of the earth politic: flags, reeds, and fishes, for those of the
waters politic; birds and insects, for those of the politic heaven and
earth; a forest for a kingdom; and a wilderness for a desolate and thin
people.

If the world politic, considered in prophecy, consists of many kingdoms,
they are represented by as many parts of the world natural; as the noblest
by the celestial frame, and then the Moon and Clouds are put for the common
people; the less noble, by the earth, sea, and rivers, and by the animals
or vegetables, or buildings therein; and then the greater and more powerful
animals and taller trees, are put for Kings, Princes, and Nobles. And
because the whole kingdom is the body politic of the King, therefore the
Sun, or a Tree, or a Beast, or Bird, or a Man, whereby the King is
represented, is put in a large signification for the whole kingdom; and
several animals, as a Lion, a Bear, a Leopard, a Goat, according to their
qualities, are put for several kingdoms and bodies politic; and sacrificing
of beasts, for slaughtering and conquering of kingdoms; and friendship
between beasts, for peace between kingdoms. Yet sometimes vegetables and
animals are, by certain epithets or circumstances, extended to other
significations; as a Tree, when called the _tree of life_ or _of
knowledge_; and a Beast, when called _the old serpent_, or worshipped.

When a Beast or Man is put for a kingdom, his parts and qualities are put
for the analogous parts and qualities of the kingdom; as the head of a
Beast, for the great men who precede and govern; the tail for the inferior
people, who follow and are governed; the heads, if more than one, for the
number of capital parts, or dynasties, or dominions in the kingdom, whether
collateral or successive, with respect to the civil government; the horns
on any head, for the number of kingdoms in that head, with respect to
military power; seeing for understanding, and the eyes for men of
understanding and policy, and in matters of religion for [Greek:
Episkopoi], Bishops; speaking, for making laws; the mouth, for a law-giver,
whether civil or sacred; the loudness of the voice, for might and power;
the faintness thereof, for weakness; eating and drinking, for acquiring
what is signified by the things eaten and drank; the hairs of a beast, or
man, and the feathers of a bird, for people; the wings, for the number of
kingdoms represented by the beast; the arm of a man, for his power, or for
any people wherein his strength and power consists; his feet, for the
lowest of the people, or for the latter end of the kingdom; the feet,
nails, and teeth of beasts of prey, for armies and squadrons of armies; the
bones, for strength, and for fortified places; the flesh, for riches and
possessions; and the days of their acting, for years; and when a tree is
put for a kingdom, its branches, leaves and fruit, signify as do the wings,
feathers, and food of a bird or beast.

When a man is taken in a mystical sense, his qualities are often signified
by his actions, and by the circumstances of things about him. So a Ruler is
signified by his riding on a beast; a Warrior and Conqueror, by his having
a sword and bow; a potent man, by his gigantic stature; a Judge, by weights
and measures; a sentence of absolution, or condemnation, by a white or a
black stone; a new dignity, by a new name; moral or civil qualifications,
by garments; honour and glory, by splendid apparel; royal dignity, by
purple or scarlet, or by a crown; righteousness, by white and clean robes;
wickedness, by spotted and filthy garments; affliction, mourning, and
humiliation, by clothing in sackcloth; dishonour, shame, and want of good
works, by nakedness; error and misery, by drinking a cup of his or her wine
that causeth it; propagating any religion for gain, by exercising traffick
and merchandize with that people whose religion it is; worshipping or
serving the false Gods of any nation, by committing adultery with their
princes, or by worshipping them; a Council of a kingdom, by its image;
idolatry, by blasphemy; overthrow in war, by a wound of man or beast; a
durable plague of war, by a sore and pain; the affliction or persecution
which a people suffers in labouring to bring forth a new kingdom, by the
pain of a woman in labour to bring forth a man-child; the dissolution of a
body politic or ecclesiastic, by the death of a man or beast; and the
revival of a dissolved dominion, by the resurrection of the dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. III.

_Of the vision of the Image composed of four Metals._

The Prophecies of _Daniel_ are all of them related to one another, as if
they were but several parts of one general Prophecy, given at several
times. The first is the easiest to be understood, and every following
Prophecy adds something new to the former. The first was given in a dream
to _Nebuchadnezzar_, King of _Babylon_, in the second year of his reign;
but the King forgetting his dream, it was given again to _Daniel_ in a
dream, and by him revealed to the King. And thereby, _Daniel_ presently
became famous for wisdom, and revealing of secrets: insomuch that _Ezekiel_
his contemporary, in the nineteenth year of _Nebuchadnezzar_, spake thus of
him to the King of _Tyre_: _Behold_, saith he, _thou art wiser than
_Daniel_, there is no secret that they can hide from thee_, Ezek. xxviii.
3. And the same _Ezekiel_, in another place, joins _Daniel_ with _Noah_ and
_Job_, as most high in the favour of God, _Ezek._ xiv. 14, 16, 18, 20. And
in the last year of _Belshazzar_, the Queen-mother said of him to the King:
_Behold there is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the holy
gods; and in the days of thy father, light and understanding and wisdom,
like the wisdom of the gods, was found in him; whom the king
_Nebuchadnezzar_ thy father, the king, I say, thy father made master of the
magicians, astrologers, _Chaldeans_ and soothsayers: forasmuch as an
excellent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams,
and shewing of hard sentences, and dissolving of doubts, were found in the
same _Daniel_, whom the king named _Belteshazzar__, Dan. v. 11, 12.
_Daniel_ was in the greatest credit amongst the _Jews_, till the reign of
the _Roman_ Emperor _Hadrian_: and to reject his Prophecies, is to reject
the Christian religion. For this religion is founded upon his Prophecy
concerning the _Messiah_.

Now in this vision of the Image composed of four Metals, the foundation of
all _Daniel_'s Prophecies is laid. It represents a body of four great
nations, which should reign over the earth successively, viz. the people of
_Babylonia_, the _Persians_, the _Greeks_, and the _Romans_. And by a stone
cut out without hands, which fell upon the feet of the Image, and brake all
the four Metals to pieces, and _became a great mountain, and filled the
whole earth_; it further represents that a new kingdom should arise, after
the four, and conquer all those nations, and grow very great, and last to
the end of all ages.

The head of the Image was of gold, and signifies the nations of
_Babylonia_, who reigned first, as _Daniel_ himself interprets. _Thou art
this head of gold_, saith he to _Nebuchadnezzar_. These nations reigned
till _Cyrus_ conquered _Babylon_, and within a few months after that
conquest revolted to the _Persians_, and set them up above the _Medes_. The
breast and arms of the Image were of silver, and represent the _Persians_
who reigned next. The belly and thighs of the Image were of brass, and
represent the _Greeks_, who, under the dominion of _Alexander_ the great,
conquered the _Persians_, and reigned next after them. The legs were of
iron, and represent the _Romans_ who reigned next after the _Greeks_, and
began to conquer them in the eighth year of _Antiochus Epiphanes_. For in
that year they conquered _Perseus_ King of _Macedon_, the fundamental
kingdom of the _Greeks_; and from thence forward grew into a mighty empire,
and reigned with great power till the days of _Theodosius_ the great. Then
by the incursion of many northern nations, they brake into many smaller
kingdoms, which are represented by the feet and toes of the Image, composed
part of iron, and part of clay. For then, saith _Daniel_, [1] _the kingdom
shall be divided, and there shall be in it of the strength of iron, but
they shall not cleave one to another._

_And in the days of these Kings_, saith _Daniel_, _shall the God of heaven
set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not
be left to other people; but it shall break in pieces, and consume all
these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. Forasmuch as thou sawest that
the stone was cut out of the mountains without hands, and that it brake in
pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver and the gold._

Notes to Chap. III.

[1] Chap. ii. 41, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. IV.

_Of the vision of the four Beasts._

In the next vision, which is of the four Beasts, the Prophecy of the four
Empires is repeated, with several new additions; such as are the two wings
of the Lion, the three ribs in the mouth of the Bear, the four wings and
four heads of the Leopard, the eleven horns of the fourth Beast, and the
son of man coming in the clouds of Heaven, to the Antient of Days sitting
in judgment.

The first Beast was like a lion, and had eagle's wings, to denote the
kingdoms of _Babylonia_ and _Media_, which overthrew the _Assyrian_ Empire,
and divided it between them, and thereby became considerable, and grew into
great Empires. In the former Prophecy, the Empire of _Babylonia_ was
represented by the head of gold; in this both Empires are represented
together by the two wings of the lion. _And I beheld,_ saith [1] _Daniel_,
_till the wings thereof were pluckt, and it was lifted up from the earth,
and made to stand upon the feet as a man, and a man's heart was given to
it_; that is, till it was humbled and subdued, and made to know its human
state.

The second Beast was like a bear, and represents the Empire which reigned
next after the _Babylonians_, that is, the Empire of the _Persians_. _Thy
kingdom is divided_, or broken, saith _Daniel_ to the last King of
_Babylon_, _and given to the _Medes_ and _Persians__, _Dan._ v. 28. This
Beast _raised itself up on one side_; the _Persians_ being under the
_Medes_ at the fall of _Babylon_, but presently rising up above them. [2]
_And it had three ribs in the mouth of it, between the teeth of it_, to
signify the kingdoms of _Sardes_, _Babylon_, and _Egypt_, which were
conquered by it, but did not belong to its proper body. And it devoured
much flesh, the riches of those three kingdoms.

The third Beast was the kingdom which succeeded the _Persian_; and this was
the empire of the _Greeks_, _Dan._ viii. 6, 7, 20, 21. It was _like a
Leopard_, to signify its fierceness; and had four heads and four wings, to
signify that it should become divided into four kingdoms, _Dan._ viii 22.
for it continued in a monarchical form during the reign of _Alexander_ the
great, and his brother _Aridæus_, and young sons _Alexander_ and
_Hercules_; and then brake into four kingdoms, by the governors of
provinces putting crowns on their own heads, and by mutual consent reigning
over their provinces. _Cassander_ reigned over _Macedon_, _Greece_, and
_Epirus_; _Lysimachus_ over _Thrace_ and _Bithynia_; _Ptolemy_ over
_Egypt_, _Lybia_, _Arabia_, _Coelosyria_, and _Palestine_; and _Seleucus_
over _Syria_.

The fourth Beast was the empire which succeeded that of the _Greeks_, and
this was the _Roman_. This beast was exceeding dreadful and terrible, and
had great iron teeth, and devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the
residue with its feet; and such was the _Roman_ empire. It was larger,
stronger, and more formidable and lasting than any of the former. It
conquered the kingdom of _Macedon_, with _Illyricum_ and _Epirus_, in the
eighth year of _Antiochus Epiphanes_, _Anno Nabonass._. 580; and inherited
that of _Pergamus_, _Anno Nabonass._ 615; and conquered that of _Syria_,
_Anno Nabonass._ 679, and that of _Egypt_, _Anno Nabonass._ 718. And by
these and other conquests it became greater and more terrible than any of
the three former Beasts. This Empire continued in its greatness till the
reign of _Theodosius_ the great; and then brake into ten kingdoms,
represented by the ten horns of this Beast; and continued in a broken form,
till the Antient of days sat in a throne like fiery flame, and _the
judgment was set, and the books were opened, and the Beast was slain and
his body destroyed, and given to the burning flames; and one like the son
of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Antient of days_
[3], and received dominion over all nations, and judgment was given to the
saints of the most high, and the time came that they possessed the kingdom.

_I beheld,_ saith [4] _Daniel_, _till the Beast was slain, and his body
destroyed, and given to the burning flames. As concerning the rest of the
Beasts, they had their dominion taken away: yet their lives were prolonged
for a season and a time_. And therefore all the four Beasts are still
alive, tho the dominion of the three first be taken away. The nations of
_Chaldea_ and _Assyria_ are still the first Beast. Those of _Media_ and
_Persia_ are still the second Beast. Those of _Macedon_, _Greece_ and
_Thrace_, _Asia_ minor, _Syria_ and _Egypt_, are still the third. And those
of _Europe_, on this side _Greece_, are still the fourth. Seeing therefore
the body of the third Beast is confined to the nations on this side the
river _Euphrates_, and the body of the fourth Beast is confined to the
nations on this side _Greece_; we are to look for all the four heads of the
third Beast, among the nations on this side of the river _Euphrates_; and
for all the eleven horns of the fourth Beast, among the nations on this
side of _Greece_. And therefore, at the breaking of the _Greek_ empire into
four kingdoms of the _Greeks_, we include no part of the _Chaldeans_,
_Medes_ and _Persians_ in those kingdoms, because they belonged to the
bodies of the two first Beasts. Nor do we reckon the _Greek_ empire seated
at _Constantinople_, among the horns of the fourth Beast, because it
belonged to the body of the third.

Notes to Chap. IV.

[1] Chap. vii. 4.

[2] Chap. vii. 5.

[3] Chap. vii. 13.

[4] Chap. vii. 11, 12.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. V.

_Of the Kingdoms represented by the feet of the Image composed of iron and
clay._

_Dacia_ was a large country bounded on the south by the _Danube_, on the
east by the _Euxine_ sea, on the north by the river _Neister_ and the
mountain _Crapac_, and on the west by the river _Tibesis_, or _Teys_, which
runs southward into the _Danube_ a little above _Belgrade_. It comprehended
the countries now called _Transylvania_, _Moldavia_, and _Wallachia_, and
the eastern part of the upper _Hungary_. Its antient inhabitants were
called _Getæ_ by the _Greeks_, _Daci_ by the _Latins_, and _Goths_ by
themselves. _Alexander_ the great attacked them, and _Trajan_ conquered
them, and reduced their country into a Province of the _Roman_ Empire: and
thereby the propagation of the Gospel among them was much promoted. They
were composed of several _Gothic_ nations, called _Ostrogoths_,
_Visigoths_, _Vandals_, _Gepides_, _Lombards_, _Burgundians_, _Alans_, &c.
who all agreed in their manners, and spake the same language, as
_Procopius_ represents. While they lived under the _Romans_, the _Goths_ or
_Ostrogoths_ were seated in the eastern parts of _Dacia_, the _Vandals_ in
the western part upon the river _Teys_, where the rivers _Maresh_ and
_Keresh_ run into it. The _Visigoths_ were between them. The _Gepides_,
according to _Jornandes_, were upon the _Vistula_. The _Burgundians_, a
_Vandalic_ nation, were between the _Vistula_ and the southern fountain of
the _Boristhenes_, at some distance from the mountain _Crapac_ northwards,
where _Ptolemy_ places them, by the names of _Phrugundiones_ and
_Burgiones_.[1] The _Alans_, another _Gothic_ nation, were between the
northern fountain of the _Boristhenes_ and the mouth of the river _Tanais_,
where _Ptolemy_ placeth the mountain _Alanus_, and western side of the
_Palus Mæotis_.

These nations continued under the dominion of the _Romans_ till the second
year of the Emperor _Philip_, and then for want of their military pay began
to revolt; the _Ostrogoths_ setting up a kingdom, which, under their Kings
_Ostrogotha_, _Cniva_, _Araric_, _Geperic_, and _Hermanaric_, increased
till the year of Christ 376; and then by an incursion of the _Huns_ from
beyond the _Tanais_, and the death of _Hermanaric_, brake into several
smaller kingdoms. _Hunnimund_, the son of _Hermanaric_, became King over
the _Ostrogoths_; _Fridigern_ over the _Visigoths_; _Winithar_, or
_Vinithar_, over a part of the _Goths_ called _Gruthungi_ by _Ammian_,
_Gothunni_ by _Claudian_, and _Sarmatæ_ and _Scythians_ by others:
_Athanaric_ reign'd over another part of the _Goths_ in _Dacia_, called
_Thervingi_; _Box_ over the _Antes_ in _Sarmatia_; and the _Gepides_ had
also their King. The _Vandals_ fled over the _Danube_ from _Geberic_ in the
latter end of the reign of _Constantine_ the great, and had seats granted
them in _Pannonia_ by that Emperor, where they lived quietly forty years,
viz. till the year 377, when several _Gothic_ nations flying from the
_Hunns_ came over the _Danube_, and had seats granted them in _Mæsia_ and
_Thrace_ by the _Greek_ Emperor _Valens_. But the next year they revolted,
called in some _Goths_, _Alans_ and _Hunns_, from beyond the _Danube_, and
routed the _Roman_ army, slew the Emperor _Valens_, and spread themselves
into _Greece_ and _Pannonia_ as far as the _Alps_. In the years 379 and 380
they were checkt by the arms of the Emperors _Gratian_ and _Theodosius_,
and made a submissive peace; the _Visigoths_ and _Thervingi_ returned to
their seats in _Mæsia_ and _Thrace_, the _Hunns_ retired over the _Danube_,
and the _Alans_ and _Gruthingi_ obtained seats in _Pannonia_.

About the year 373, or 374, the _Burgundians_ rose from their seats upon
the _Vistula_, with an army of eighty thousand men to invade _Gallia_; and
being opposed, seated themselves upon the northern side of the _Rhine_ over
against _Mentz_. In the year 358, a body of the _Salian Franks_, with their
King, coming from the river _Sala_, were received into the Empire by the
Emperor _Julian_, and seated in _Gallia_ between _Brabant_ and the _Rhine_:
and their King _Mellobaudes_ was made _Comes domesticorum_, by the Emperor
_Gratian_. _Richomer_, another noble _Salian Frank_, was made _Comes
domesticorum_, and _Magister utriusque Militiæ_, by _Theodosius_; and A.C.
384, was Consul with _Clearchus_. He was a great favourite of _Theodosius_,
and accompanied him in his wars against _Eugenius_, but died in the
expedition, and left a son called _Theudomir_, who afterwards became King
of the _Salian Franks_ in _Brabant_. In the time of this war some _Franks_
from beyond the _Rhine_ invaded _Gallia_ under the conduct of _Genobald_,
_Marcomir_ and _Suno_, but were repulsed by _Stilico_; and _Marcomir_ being
slain, was succeeded in _Germany_ by his son _Pharamond_.

While these nations remained quiet within the Empire, subject to the
_Romans_, many others continued so beyond the _Danube_ till the death of
the Emperor _Theodosius_, and then rose up in arms. For _Paulus Diaconus_
in his _Historia Miscell._ _lib._ xiv. speaking of the times next after the
death of this Emperor, tells us: _Eodem tempore erant Gothi & aliæ gentes
maximæ trans Danubium habitantes: ex quibus rationabiliores quatuor sunt,
Gothi scilicet, Huisogothi, Gepides & Vandali; & nomen tantum & nihil aliud
mutantes. Isti sub Arcadia & Honorio Danubium transeuntes, locati sunt in
terra Romanorum: & Gepides quidem, ex quibus postea divisi sunt Longobardi
& Avares, villas, quæ sunt circa Singidonum & Sirmium, habitavere:_ and
_Procopius_ in the beginning of his _Historia Vandalica_ writes to the same
purpose. Hitherto the _Western Empire_ continued entire, but now brake into
many kingdoms.

_Theodosius_ died A.C. 395; and then the _Visigoths_, under the conduct of
_Alaric_ the successor of _Fridigern_, rose from their seats in _Thrace_
and wasted _Macedon_, _Thessaly_, _Achaia_, _Peloponnesus_, and _Epirus_,
with fire and sword for five years together; when turning westward, they
invaded _Dalmatia_, _Illyricum_ and _Pannonia_; and from thence went into
_Italy_ A.C. 402; and the next year were so beaten at _Pollentia_ and
_Verona_, by _Stilico_ the commander of the forces of the _Western Empire_,
that _Claudian_ calls the remainder of the forces of _Alaric_, _tanta ex
gente reliquias breves_, and _Prudentius_, _Gentem deletam_. Thereupon
_Alaric_ made peace with the Emperor, being so far humbled, that _Orosius_
saith, he did, _pro pace optima & quibuscunque sedibus suppliciter &
simpliciter orare_. This peace was ratified by mutual hostages; _Ætius_ was
sent hostage to _Alaric_; and _Alaric_ continued a free Prince in the seats
now granted to him.

When _Alaric_ took up arms, the nations beyond the _Danube_ began to be in
motion; and the next winter, between A.C. 395 and 396, a great body of
_Hunns_, _Alans_, _Ostrogoths_, _Gepides_, and other northern nations, came
over the frozen _Danube_, being invited by _Rufinus_: when their brethren,
who had obtained seats within the Empire, took up arms also. _Jerome_ calls
this great multitude, _Hunns_, _Alans_, _Vandals_, _Goths_, _Sarmatians_,
_Quades_, and _Marcomans_; and saith, that they invaded all places between
_Constantinople_ and the _Julian Alps_, wasting _Scythia_, _Thrace_,
_Macedon_, _Dardania_, _Dacia_, _Thessaly_, _Achaia_, _Epirus_, _Dalmatia_,
and all _Pannonia_. The _Suevians_ also invaded _Rhætia_: for when _Alaric_
ravaged _Pannonia_, the _Romans_ were defending _Rhætia_; which gave
_Alaric_ an opportunity of invading _Italy_, as _Claudian_ thus mentions.

  _Non nisi perfidiâ nacti penetrabile tempus,_
  _Irrupere Getæ, nostras dum Rhætia vires_
  _Occupat, atque alio desudant Marte cohortes_.

And when _Alaric_ went from those parts into _Italy_, some other barbarous
nations invaded _Noricum_ and _Vindelicia_, as the same Poet _Claudian_
thus writes:

      ----_Jam foedera gentes_
  _Exuerant, Latiique auditâ clade feroces_
  _Vendelicos saltus & Norica rura tenebant._

This was in the years 402 and 403. And among these nations I reckon the
_Suevians_, _Quades_, and _Marcomans_; for they were all in arms at this
time. The _Quades_ and _Marcomans_ were _Suevian_ nations; and they and the
_Suevians_ came originally from _Bohemia_, and the river _Suevus_ or
_Sprake_ in _Lusatia_; and were now united under one common King called
_Ermeric_, who soon after led them into _Gallia_. The _Vandals_ and _Alans_
might also about this time extend themselves into _Noricum_. _Uldin_ also
with a great body of _Hunns_ passed the _Danube_ about the time of
_Chrysostom_'s banishment, that is, A.C. 404, and wasted _Thrace_ and
_Mæsia_. _Radagaisus_, King of the _Gruthunni_ and succesor of _Winithar_,
inviting over more barbarians from beyond the _Danube_, invaded _Italy_
with an army of above two hundred thousand _Goths_; and within a year or
two, A.C. 405 or 406., was overcome by _Stilico_, and perished with his
army. In this war _Stilico_ was assisted with a great body of _Hunns_ and
_Ostrogoths_, under the conduct of _Uldin_ and _Sarus_, who were hired by
the Emperor _Honorius_. In all this confusion it was necessary for the
_Lombards_ in _Pannonia_ to arm themselves in their own defence, and assert
their liberty, the _Romans_ being no longer able to protect them.

And now _Stilico_ purposing to make himself Emperor, procured a military
prefecture for _Alaric_, and sent him into the _East_ in the service of
_Honorius_ the _Western_ Emperor, committing some _Roman_ troops to his
conduct to strengthen his army of _Goths_, and promising to follow soon
after with his own army. His pretence was to recover some regions of
_Illyricum_, which the _Eastern_ Emperor was accused to detain injuriously
from the _Western_; but his secret design was to make himself Emperor, by
the assistance of the _Vandals_ and their allies: for he himself was a
_Vandal_. For facilitating this design, he invited a great body of the
barbarous nations to invade the _Western Empire_, while he and _Alaric_
invaded the _Eastern_. And these nations under their several Kings, the
_Vandals_ under _Godegisilus_, the _Alans_ in two bodies, the one under
_Goar_, the other under _Resplendial_, and the _Suevians_, _Quades_, and
_Marcomans_, under _Ermeric_, marched thro' _Rhætia_ to the side of the
_Rhine_, leaving their seats in _Pannonia_ to the _Hunns_ and _Ostrogoths_,
and joined the _Burgundians_ under _Gundicar_, and ruffled the _Franks_ in
their further march. On the last of _December_ A.C. 406, they passed the
_Rhine_ at _Ments_, and spread themselves into _Germania prima_ and the
adjacent regions; and amongst other actions the _Vandals_ took _Triers_.
Then they advanced into _Belgium_, and began to waste that country.
Whereupon the _Salian Franks_ in _Brabant_ took up arms, and under the
conduct of _Theudomir_, the son of _Ricimer_, or _Richomer_,
abovementioned, made so stout a resistance, that they slew almost twenty
thousand of the _Vandals_, with their King _Godegesilus_, in battel; the
rest escaping only by a party of _Resplendial_'s _Alans_ which came timely
to their assistance.

Then the _British_ soldiers, alarm'd by the rumour of these things,
revolted, and set up Tyrants there; first _Marcus_, whom they slew
presently; then _Gratian_, whom they slew within four months; and lastly
_Constantine_, under whom they invaded _Gallia_ A.C. 408, being favoured by
_Goar_ and _Gundicar_. And _Constantine_ having possessed a good part of
_Gallia_, created his son _Constans Cæsar_, and sent him into _Spain_ to
order his affairs there, A.C. 409.

In the mean time _Resplendial_, seeing the aforesaid disaster of the
_Vandals_, and that _Goar_ was gone over to the _Romans_, led his army from
the _Rhine_; and, together with the _Suevians_ and residue of the
_Vandals_, went towards _Spain_; the _Franks_ in the mean time prosecuting
their victory so far as to retake _Triers_, which after they had plundered
they left to the _Romans_. The _Barbarians_ were at first stopt by the
_Pyrenean_ mountains, which made them spread themselves into _Aquitain_:
but the next year they had the passage betrayed by some soldiers of
_Constans_; and entring _Spain_ 4 Kal. _Octob._ A.C. 409, they conquered
every one what he could; and at length, A.C. 411, divided their conquests
by lot; the _Vandals_ obtained _Boetica_, and part of _Gallæcia_; the
_Suevians_ the rest of _Gallæcia_; and the _Alans_ _Lusitania_ and the
_Carthaginian_ Province: the Emperor for the sake of peace confirming them
in those seats by grant A.C. 413.

The _Roman Franks_ abovementioned, having made _Theudomir_ their King,
began strait after their conquest of the _Vandals_ to invade their
neighbours also. The first they set upon were the _Gauls_ of _Brabant_[2]:
but meeting with notable resistance, they desired their alliance: and so
those _Gauls_ fell off from the _Romans_, and made an intimate league with
the _Franks_ to be as one people, marrying with one another, and conforming
to one another's manners, till they became one without distinction. Thus by
the access of these _Gauls_, and of the foreign _Franks_ also, who
afterwards came over the _Rhine_, the _Salian_ kingdom soon grew very great
and powerful.

_Stilico_'s expedition against the _Greek_ Emperor was stopt by the order
of _Honorius_; and then _Alaric_ came out of _Epirus_ into _Noricum_, and
requested a sum of money for his service. The Senate were inclined to deny
him, but by _Stilico_'s mediation granted it. But after some time _Stilico_
being accused of a traiterous conspiracy with _Alaric_, and slain 10 Kal.
_Sept._ A.C. 408; _Alaric_ was thereby disappointed of his money, and
reputed an enemy to the Empire; he then broke strait into _Italy_ with the
army he brought out of _Epirus_, and sent to his brother _Adolphus_ to
follow him with what forces he had in _Pannonia_, which were not great, but
yet not to be despised. Thereupon _Honorius_ fearing to be shut up in
_Rome_, retired to _Ravenna_ in _October_ A.C. 408. And from that time
_Ravenna_ continued to be the seat of the _Western_ Emperors. In those days
the _Hunns_ also invaded _Pannonia_; and seizing the deserted seats of the
_Vandals_, _Alans_, and _Goths_, founded a new kingdom there. _Alaric_
advancing to _Rome_ besieged it, and 9 Kal. _Sept._ A.C. 410 took it: and
afterwards attempting to pass into _Africa_, was shipwrackt. After which
_Honorius_ made peace with him, and got up an army to send against the
Tyrant _Constantine_.

At the same time _Gerontius_, one of _Constantine_'s captains, revolted
from him, and set up _Maximus_ Emperor in _Spain_. Whereupon _Constantine_
sent _Edobec_, another of his captains, to draw to his assistance, the
_Barbarians_ under _Goar_ and _Gundicar_ in _Gallia_, and supplies of
_Franks_ and _Alemans_ from beyond the _Rhine_; and committed the custody
of _Vienne_ in _Gallia Narbonensis_ to his son _Constans_. _Gerontius_
advancing, first slew _Constans_ at _Vienne_, and then began to besiege
_Constantine_ at _Arles_. But _Honorius_ at the same time sending
_Constantius_ with an army on the same errand, _Gerontius_ fled, and
_Constantius_ continued the siege, strengthned by the access of the
greatest part of the soldiers of _Gerontius_. After four months siege,
_Edobec_ having procured succours, the _Barbarian_ Kings at _Ments_, _Goar_
and _Gundicar_, constitute _Jovinus_ Emperor, and together with him set
forward to relieve _Arles_. At their approach _Constantius_ retired. They
pursued, and he beat them by surprize; but not prosecuting his victory, the
_Barbarians_ soon recovered themselves; yet not so as to hinder the fall of
the tyrants _Constantine_, _Jovinus_ and _Maximus_. _Britain_ could not be
recovered to the Empire, but remained ever after a distinct kingdom.

The next year, A.C. 412, the _Visigoths_ being beaten in _Italy_, had
_Aquitain_ granted them to retire into: and they invaded it with much
violence, causing the _Alans_ and _Burgundians_ to retreat, who were then
depopulating of it. At the same time the _Burgundians_ were brought to
peace; and the Emperor granted them for inheritance a region upon the
_Rhine_ which they had invaded: and the same, I presume, he did with the
_Alans_. But the _Franks_ not long after retaking and burning _Triers_,
_Castinus_, A.C. 415, was sent against them with an army, who routed them
and slew _Theudomir_ their King This was the second taking of _Triers_ by
the _Franks_. It was therefore taken four times, once by the _Vandals_ and
thrice by the _Franks_. _Theudomir_ was succeeded by _Pharamond_, the
Prince or King of the _Salian Franks_ in _Germany_. From thence he brought
new forces, reigned over the whole, and had seats granted to his people
within the Empire near the _Rhine_.

And now the _Barbarians_ were all quieted, and settled in several kingdoms
within the Empire, not only by conquest, but also by the grants of the
Emperor _Honorius_. For _Rutilius_ in his _Itinerary_, written in Autumn,
_Anno Urbis_ 1169, that is, according to _Varro_'s computation then in use,
A.C. 416, thus laments the wasted fields:

  _Illa quidem longis nimium deformia bellis_;

And then adds,

  _Jam tempus laceris post longa incendia fundis_
    _Vel pastorales ædificare casas._

And a little after,

  _Æternum tibi Rhenus aret._

And _Orosius_ in the end of his history, which was finished A.C. 417,
represents now a general pacification of the barbarous nations by the words
_comprimere_, _coangustare_, _addicere gentes immanissimas_; terming them
_imperio addictas_, because they had obtained seats in the Empire by league
and compact; and _coangustatas_, because they did no longer invade all
regions at pleasure, but by the same compact remained quiet in the seats
then granted them. And these are the kingdoms, of which the feet of the
Image were henceforward composed, and which are represented by iron and
clay intermixed, which did not stick one to another, and were of different
strength.

Notes to Chap. V.

[1] Procop. l. 1. de Bello Vandalico.

[2] Galli Arborici: _whence the region was named _Arboricbant_, and by
contraction _Brabant__.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. VI.

_Of the ten Kingdoms represented by the ten horns of the fourth Beast._

Now by the wars above described the _Western_ Empire of the _Romans_, about
the time that _Rome_ was besieged and taken by the _Goths_, became broken
into the following ten kingdoms.

  1. The kingdom of the _Vandals_ and _Alans_ in _Spain_ and _Africa_.
  2. The kingdom of the _Suevians_ in _Spain_.
  3. The kingdom of the _Visigoths_.
  4. The kingdom of the _Alans_ in _Gallia_.
  5. The kingdom of the _Burgundians_.
  6. The kingdom of the _Franks_.
  7. The kingdom of the _Britains_.
  8. The kingdom of the _Hunns_.
  9. The kingdom of the _Lombards_.
  10. The kingdom of _Ravenna_.

Seven of these kingdoms are thus mentioned by _Sigonius_. 1_Honorio
regnante_, _in Pannoniam_ 2_Hunni_, _in Hispaniam_ 3_Vandali_, 4_Alani_,
5_Suevi_ & 6_Gothi_, _in Galliam_ 4_Alani_ 7_Burgundiones_ & 6_Gothi_,
_certis sedibus permissis, accepti_. Add the _Franks_, _Britains_, and
_Lombards_, and you have the ten: for these arose about the same time with
the seven. But let us view them severally.

1. The Kings of the _Vandals_ were, A.C. 407 _Godegesilus_, 407 _Gunderic_,
426 _Geiseric_, 477 _Hunneric_, 484 _Gundemund_, 496 _Thrasamund_, 513
_Geiseric_, 530 _Gelimer_. _Godegesilus_ led them into _Gallia_ A.C. 406,
_Gunderic_ into _Spain_ A.C. 409, _Geiseric_ into _Africa_ A.C. 427; and
_Gelimer_ was conquered by _Belisarius_ A.C. 533. Their kingdom lasted in
_Gallia_, _Spain_ and _Africa_ together 126 years; and in _Africa_ they
were very potent. The _Alans_ had only two Kings of their own in _Spain_,
_Resplendial_, and _Ataces_, _Utacus_ or _Othacar_. Under _Resplendial_
they went into _France_ A.C. 407, and into _Spain_ A.C. 409. _Ataces_ was
slain with almost all his army by _Vallia_ King of the _Visigoths_ A.C.
419. And then the remainder of these _Alans_ subjected themselves to
_Gunderic_ King of the _Vandals_ in _Boetica_, and went afterwards with
them into _Africa_, as I learn out of _Procopius_. Whence the Kings of the
_Vandals_ styled themselves Kings of the _Vandals_ and _Alans_; as may be
seen in the Edict of _Hunneric_ recited by _Victor_ in his _Vandalic_
persecution. In conjunction with the _Chatti_, these _Alans_ gave the name
of _Cathalaunia_, or _Catth-Alania_, to the Province which is still so
called. These _Alans_ had also _Gepides_ among them; and therefore the
_Gepides_ came into _Pannonia_ before the _Alans_ left it. There they
became subject to the _Hunns_ till the death of _Attila_ A.C. 454, and at
length were conquered by the _Ostrogoths_.

2. The Kings of the _Suevians_ were, A.C. 407 _Ermeric_, 458 _Rechila_, 448
_Rechiarius_, 458 _Maldra_, 460 _Frumarius_, 463 _Regismund_. And after
some other Kings who are unknown, reigned A.C. 558 _Theudomir_, 568 _Miro_,
582 _Euboricus_, and 583 _Andeca_. This kingdom, after it had been once
seated in _Spain_, remained always in _Gallæcia_ and _Lusitania_. _Ermeric_
after the fall of the _Alan_ kingdom, enlarged it into all _Gallæcia_,
forcing the _Vandals_ to retire into _Boetica_ and the _Carthaginian_
Province. This kingdom lasted 177 years according to _Isidorus_, and then
was subdued by _Leovigildus_ King of the _Visigoths_, and made a Province
of his kingdom A.C. 585.

3. The Kings of the _Visigoths_ were, A.C. 400 _Alaric_, 410 _Athaulphus_,
415 _Sergeric_ and _Vallia_, 419 _Theoderic_, 451 _Thorismund_, 452
_Theoderic_, 465 _Euric_, 482 _Alaric_, 505 _Gensalaric_, 526 _Amalaric_,
531 _Theudius_, 548 _Theudisclus_, &c. I date this kingdom from the time
that _Alaric_ left _Thrace_ and _Greece_ to invade the _Western Empire_. In
the end of the reign of _Athaulphus_ the _Goths_ were humbled by the
_Romans_, and attempted to pass out of _France_ into _Spain_. _Sergeric_
reigned but a few days. In the beginning of _Vallia_'s reign they assaulted
the _Romans_ afresh, but were again repulsed, and then made peace on this
condition, that they should on the behalf of the Empire invade the
_Barbarian_ kingdoms in _Spain_: and this they did, together with the
_Romans_, in the years 417 and 418, overthrowing the _Alans_ and part of
the _Vandals_. Then they received _Aquitain_ of the Emperor by a full
donation, leaving their conquests in _Spain_ to the Emperor: and thereby
the seats of the conquered _Alans_ came into the hands of the _Romans_. In
the year 455, _Theoderic_, assisted by the _Burgundians_, invaded _Spain_,
which was then almost all subject to the _Suevians_, and took a part of it
from them. A.C. 506, the _Goths_ were driven out of _Gallia_ by the
_Franks_. A.C. 585, they conquered the _Suevian_ kingdom, and became Lords
of all _Spain_. A.C. 713, the _Saracens_ invaded them, but in time they
recovered their dominions, and have reigned in _Spain_ ever since.

4. The Kings of the _Alans_ in _Gallia_ were _Goar_, _Sambida_, _Eocharic_,
_Sangibanus_, _Beurgus_, &c. Under _Goar_ they invaded _Gallia_ A.C. 407,
and had seats given them near the _Rhine_, A.C. 412. Under _Sambida_, whom
_Bucher_ makes the successor, if not the son of _Goar_, they had the
territories of _Valence_ given them by _Ætius_ the Emperor's General, A.C.
440. Under _Eocharic_ they conquered a region of the rebelling _Galli
Arborici_, given them also by _Ætius_. This region was from them named
_Alenconium, quasi Alanorum conventus_. Under _Sangibanus_ they were
invaded, and their regal city _Orleans_ was besieged by _Attila_ King of
the _Hunns_, with a vast army of 500000 men. _Ætius_ and the _Barbarian_
Kings of _Gallia_ came to raise the siege, and beat the _Hunns_ in a very
memorable battle, A.C. 451, _in campis Catalaunicis_, so called from these
_Alans_ mixt with the _Chatti_. The region is now called _Campania_ or
_Champagne_. In that battle were slain on both sides 162000 men. A year or
two after, _Attila_ returned with an immense army to conquer this kingdom,
but was again beaten by them and the _Visigoths_ together in a battle of
three days continuance, with a slaughter almost as great as the former.
Under _Beurgus_, or _Biorgor_, they infested _Gallia_ round about, till the
reign of _Maximus_ the Emperor; and then they passed the _Alps_ in winter,
and came into _Liguria_, but were there beaten, and _Beurgus_ slain, by
_Ricimer_ commander of the Emperor's forces, A.C. 464. Afterwards they were
again beaten, by the joint force of _Odoacer_ King of _Italy_ and
_Childeric_ King of the _Franks_, about the year 480, and again by
_Theudobert_ King of the _Austrian Franks_ about the year 511.

5. The Kings of the _Burgundians_ were, A.C. 407 _Gundicar_, 436 _Gundioc_,
467 _Bilimer_, 473 _Gundobaldus_ with his brothers, 510 _Sigismund_, 517
_Godomarus_. Under _Gundicar_ they invaded _Gallia_ A.C. 407, and had seats
given them by the Emperor near the _Rhine_ in _Gallia Belgica_, A.C. 412.
They had _Saxons_ among them, and were now so potent, that _Orosius_ A.C.
417 wrote of them: '_Burgundionum esse prævalidam manum, Galliæ hodieque
testes sunt, in quibus præsumpta possessione consistunt_. About the year
435 they received great overthrows by _Ætius_, and soon after by the
_Hunns_: but five years after had _Savoy_ granted them to be shared with
the inhabitants; and from that time became again a potent kingdom, being
bounded by the river _Rhodanus_, but afterwards extending much further into
the heart of _Gallia_. _Gundobald_ conquered the regions about the rivers
_Araris_ and _Rhodanus_, with the territories of _Marseilles_; and invading
_Italy_ in the time of the Emperor _Glycerius_, conquered all his brethren.
_Godomarus_ made _Orleans_ his royal seat: whence the kingdom was called
_Regnum Aurelianorum_. He was conquered by _Clotharius_ and _Childebert_,
Kings of the _Franks_, A.C. 526. From thenceforward this kingdom was
sometimes united to the kingdom of the _Franks_, and sometimes divided from
it, till the reign of _Charles_ the great, who made his son _Carolottus_
King of _Burgundy_. From that time, for about 300 years together, it
enjoyed its proper Kings; and was then broken into the Dukedom of
_Burgundy_, County of _Burgundy_, and County of _Savoy_; and afterwards
those were broken into other lesser Counties.

6. The Kings of the _Franks_ were, A.C. 407 _Theudomir_, 417 _Pharamond_,
428 _Clodio_, 448 _Merovæus_, 456 _Childeric_, 482 _Clodovæus_, &c.
_Windeline_ and _Bucher_, two of the most diligent searchers into the
originals of this kingdom, make it begin the same year with the _Barbarian_
invasions of _Gallia_, that is, A.C. 407. Of the first Kings there is in
_Labbe's Bibliotheca M.S._ this record.

_Historica quædam excerpta ex veteri stemmate genealogico Regum Franciæ_.

_Genobaldus, Marcomerus, Suno, Theodemeris. Isti duces vel reguli
extiterunt à principio gentis Francorum diversis temporibus. Sed incertum
relinquunt historici quali sibi procreations lineâ successerunt_.

_Pharamundus: sub hoc rege suo primo Franci legibus se subdunt, quas
primores eorum tulerunt Wisogastus, Atrogastus, Salegastus_.

_Chlochilo. Iste, transito Rheno, Romanos in Carbonaria sylva devicit,
Camaracum cepit & obtinuit, annis 20 regnavit. Sub hoc rege Franci usque
Summam progressi sunt_.

_Merovechus. Sub hoc rege Franci Trevirim destruunt, Metim succendunt,
usque Aurelianum perveniunt_.

Now for _Genobaldus_, _Marcomer_ and _Suno_, they were captains of the
_Transrhenane Franks_ in the reign of _Theodosius_, and concern us not. We
are to begin with _Theudomir_ the first King of the rebelling _Salii_,
called _Didio_ by _Ivo Carnotensis_, and _Thiedo_ and _Theudemerus_ by
_Rhenanus_. His face is extant in a coin of gold found with this
inscription, THEUDEMIR REX, published by _Petavius_, and still or lately
extant, as _Windeline_ testifies: which shews that he was a King, and that
in _Gallia_; seeing that rude _Germany_ understood not then the coining of
money, nor used either _Latin_ words or letters. He was the son of
_Ricimer_, or _Richomer_, the favourite of the Emperor _Theodosius_; and so
being a _Roman Frank_, and of the _Salian_ royal blood, they therefore upon
the rebellion made him King. The whole time of his reign you have stated in
_Excerptis Gregorii Turonensis è Fredigario_, _cap._ 5, 6, 7, 8. where the
making him King, the tyranny of _Jovinus_, the slaughter of the associates
of _Jovinus_, the second taking of _Triers_ by the _Franks_, and their war
with _Castinus_, in which this King was slain, are as a series of
successive things thus set down in order. _Extinctis Ducibus in Francis,
denuo Reges creantur ex eadem stirpe qua prius fuerant. Eodem tempore
Jovinus ornatus regios assumpsit. Constantinus fugam versus Italiam
dirigit; missis a Jovino Principe percussoribus super Mentio flumine,
capite truncatur. Multi nobilium jussu Jovini apud Avernis capti, & a
ducibus Honorii crudeliter interempti sunt. Trevirorum civitas, factione
unius ex senatoribus nomine Lucii, à Francis captà & incensa est.--Castinus
Domesticorum Comes expeditionem accipit contra Francos_, &c. Then returning
to speak of _Theudomir_, he adds: _Franci electum à se regem, sicut prius
fuerat, crinitum inquirentes diligenter ex genere Priami, Frigi &
Francionis, super se crearunt nomine Theudemerum filium Richemeris, qui in
hoc prælio quod supra memini, à Romanis interfectus est_; that is, in the
battle with _Castinus_'s army. Of his death _Gregory Turonensis_ makes this
further mention: _In consularibus legimus Theodemerem regem Francorum
filium Ricimeris quondam, & Ascilam matrem ejus, gladio interfectos_.

Upon this victory of the _Romans_, the _Franks_ and rebelling _Gauls_, who
in the time of _Theudomir_ were at war with one another, united to
strengthen themselves, as _Ordericus Vitalis_[1] thus mentions. _Cum Galli
prius contra Romanos rebellâssent, Franci iis sociati sunt, & pariter
juncti, Ferramundum Sunonis ducis filium, sibi regem præfecerunt_.
_Prosper_ sets down the time; _Anno 25 Honorii, Pharamundus regnat in
Francia_. This, _Bucher_ well observes, refers to the end of the year 416,
or the beginning of the next year, dating the years of _Honorius_ from the
death of _Valentinian_; and argues well, that at this time _Pharamond_ was
not only King by the constitution of the _Franks_, but crowned also by the
consent of _Honorius_, and had a part of _Gallia_ assigned him by covenant.
And this might be the cause that _Roman_ writers reckoned him the first
King: which some not understanding, have reputed him the founder of this
kingdom by an army of the _Transrhenane Franks_. He might come with such an
army, but he succeeded _Theudomir_ by right of blood and consent of the
people. For the above cited passage of _Fredigarius_, _Extinctis Ducibus,
in Francis denuo Reges creantur ex eadem stirpe quâ prius fuerant_, implies
that the kingdom continued to this new elected family during the reign of
more Kings than one. If you date the years of _Honorius_ from the death of
his father, the reign of _Pharamond_ might begin two years later than is
assigned by _Bucher_. The _Salique_ laws made in his reign, which are yet
extant, shew by their name that it was the kingdom of the _Salii_ over
which he reigned; and, by the pecuniary mulcts in them, that the place
where he reigned abounded much with money, and consequently was within the
Empire; rude _Germany_ knowing not the use of money, till they mixed with
the _Romans_. In the Preface also to the _Salique_ laws, written and
prefixed to them soon after the conversion of the _Franks_ to the Christian
religion, that is, in the end of the reign of _Merovæus_, or soon after,
the original of this kingdom is thus described: _Hæc enim gens, quæ fortis
dum esset & robore valida, Romanorum jugum durissimum de suis cervicibus
excussit pugnando_, &c. This kingdom therefore was erected, not by invasion
but by rebellion, as was described above. _Prosper_ in registering their
Kings in order, tells us: _Pharamundus regnat in Francia; Clodio regnat in
Francia; Merovæus regnat in Francia_: and who can imagine but that in all
these places he meant one and the same _Francia_? And yet 'tis certain that
the _Francia_ of _Merovæus_ was in _Gallia_.

Yet the father of _Pharamond_, being king of a body of _Franks_ in
_Germany_ in the reign of the Emperor _Theodosius_, as above, _Pharamond_
might reign over the same _Franks_ in _Germany_ before he succeeded
_Theudomir_ in the kingdom of the _Salians_ within the Empire, and even
before _Theudomir_ began his reign; suppose in the first year of
_Honorius_, or when those _Franks_ being repulsed by _Stilico_, lost their
Kings _Marcomir_ and _Suno_, one of which was the father of _Pharamond_:
and the _Roman Franks_, after the death of _Theudomir_, might invite
_Pharamond_ with his people from beyond the _Rhine_. But we are not to
regard the reign of _Pharamond_ in _Germany_: we are to date this kingdom
from its rise within the Empire, and to look upon it as strengthened by the
access of other _Franks_ coming from beyond the _Rhine_, whether in the
reign of this King or in that of his successor _Clodio_. For in the last
year of _Pharamond_'s reign, _Ætius_ took from him a part of his possession
in _Gallia_: but his successor _Clodio_, whom _Fredigarius_ represents as
the son of _Theudomir_, and some call _Clogio_, _Cloio_, and _Claudius_,
inviting from beyond the _Rhine_ a great body of _Franks_, recovered all,
and carried on their conquests as far as the river _Soame_. Then those
_Franks_ dividing conquests with him, erected certain new kingdoms at
_Cologn_ and _Cambray_, and some other cities: all which were afterwards
conquered by _Clodovæus_, who also drove the _Goths_ out of _Gallia_, and
fix'd his seat at _Paris_, where it has continued ever since. And this was
the original of the present kingdom of _France_.

7. The Kings of _Britain_ were, A.C. 407 or 408, _Marcus_, _Gratian_, and
_Constantine_ successively; A.C. 425 _Vortigern_, 466 _Aurelius Ambrosius_,
498 _Uther Pendraco_, 508 _Arthur_, 542 _Constantinus_, 545 _Aurelius
Cunanus_, 578 _Vortiporeus_, 581 _Malgo_, 586 _Careticus_, 613 _Cadwan_,
635 _Cadwalin_, 676 _Cadwallader_. The three first were _Roman_ Tyrants,
who revolted from the Empire. _Orosius_, _Prosper_ and _Zosimus_ connect
their revolt with the irruptions of the _Barbarians_ into _Gallia_, as
consequent thereunto. _Prosper_, with whom _Zosimus_ agrees, puts it in the
year which began the day after that irruption. The just time I thus
collect: _Marcus_ reigned not many days, _Gratian_ four months, and
_Constantine_ three years. He was slain the year after the taking of
_Rome_, that is A.C. 411, 14 Kal. _Octob._ Whence the revolt was in Spring
A.C. 408. _Sozomen_ joins _Constantine_'s expedition into _Gallia_ with
_Arcadius_'s death, or the times a little after; and _Arcadius_ died A.C.
408 _May_ the 1st. Now tho the reign of these Tyrants was but short, yet
they gave a beginning to the kingdom of _Britain_, and so may be reckoned
the three first Kings, especially since the posterity of _Constantine_,
viz. his sons _Aurelius Ambrosius_, and _Uther Pendraco_, and his grandson
_Arthur_, reigned afterwards. For from the time of the revolt of these
Tyrants _Britain_ continued a distict kingdom absolved from subjection to
the Empire, the Emperor not being able to spare soldiers to be sent thither
to receive and keep the Island, and therefore neglecting it; as we learn by
unquestionable records. For _Prosper_ tells us; _A.C._ 410, _Variane Cos.
Hac tempestate præ valetudine Romanorum, vires funditùs attenuatæ
Britanniæ_. And _Sigebert_, conjoining this with the siege of _Rome_,
saith: _Britannorum vires attenuatæ, & substrahunt se à Romanorum
dominatione_. And _Zosimus_ _lib._ 6. _The _Transrhenane Barbarians_
invading all places, reduced the inhabitants of the island of _Britain_,
and also certain _Celtic_ nations to that pass, that they fell off from the
_Roman_ Empire; and being no longer obedient to the _Roman_ laws_, [Greek:
kat' heauton biateuein], _they lived in separate bodies after their own
pleasure. The _Britons_ therefore taking up arms, and hazarding themselves
for their own safety, freed their cities from the imminent _Barbarians_. In
like manner all _Brabant_ and some other Provinces of the _Gauls_ imitating
the _Britons_, freed themselves also, ejecting the _Roman_ Presidents, and
forming themselves into a sort of commonwealth according to their own
pleasure. This rebellion of _Britain_ and the _Celtic_ nations happened
when _Constantine_ usurped the kingdom_. So also _Procopius_, _lib._ 1.
_Vandal._ speaking of the same _Constantine_, saith: Constantine _being
overcome in battle, was slain with his children:_ [Greek: Bretannian men
toi Rômaioi anasôsasthai ouketi echon; all' ousa hypo tyrannous ap' autou
emene.] _Yet the _Romans_ could not recover _Britain_ any more, but from
that time it remained under Tyrants_. And _Beda_, l. 1. _c._ 11. _Fracta
est Roma à Gothis anno 1164 suæ conditionis; ex quo tempore Romani in
Britannia regnare cessaverunt_. And _Ethelwaldus_: _A tempore Romæ à Gothis
expugnatæ, cessavit imperium Romanorum à Britannia insula, & ab aliis; quas
sub jugo servitutis tenebant, multis terris_. And _Theodoret_, _serm._ 9.
_de curand. Græc. affect_. about the year 424, reckons the _Britons_ among
the nations which were not then in subjection to the _Roman_ Empire. Thus
_Sigonius_: _ad annum 411, Imperium Romanorum post excessum Constantini in
Britannia nullum fuit_.

Between the death of _Constantine_ and the reign of _Vortigern_ was an
interregnum of about 14 years, in which the _Britons_ had wars with the
_Picts_ and _Scots_, and twice obtained the assistance of a _Roman_ Legion,
who drove out the enemy, but told them positively at their departure that
they would come no more. Of _Vortigern_'s beginning to reign there is this
record in an old Chronicle in _Nennius_, quoted by _Camden_ and others:
_Guortigernus tenuit imperium in Britannia, Theodosio & Valentiniano Coss._
[viz. A.C. 425.] _& in quarto anno regni sui Saxones ad Britanniam
venerunt, Felice & Tauro Coss._ [viz. A.C. 428.] This coming of the
_Saxons_, _Sigebert_ refers to the 4th year of _Valentinian_, which falls
in with the year 428 assigned by this Chronicle: and two years after, the
_Saxons_ together with the _Picts_ were beaten by the _Britons_. Afterwards
in the reign of _Martian_ the Emperor, that is, between the years 450 and
456, the _Saxons_ under _Hengist_ were called in by the _Britons_, but six
years after revolted from them, made war upon them with various success,
and by degrees succeeded them. Yet the _Britons_ continued a flourishing
kingdom till the reign of _Careticus_; and the war between the two nations
continued till the pontificate of _Sergius_ A.C. 688.[2]

8. The Kings of the _Hunns_ were, A.C. 406 _Octar_ and _Rugila_, 433
_Bleda_ and _Attila_. _Octar_ and _Rugila_ were the brothers of _Munzuc_
King of the _Hunns_ in _Gothia_ beyond the _Danube_; and _Bleda_ and
_Attila_ were his sons, and _Munzuc_ was the son of _Balamir_. The two
first, as _Jornandes_ tells us, were Kings of the _Hunns_, but not of them
all; and had the two last for their successors. I date the reign of the
_Hunns_ in _Pannonia_ from the time that the _Vandals_ and _Alans_
relinquished _Pannonia_ to them, A.C. 407. _Sigonius_ from the time that
the _Visigoths_ relinquished _Pannonia_ A. C. 408. _Constat_, saith he,
_quod Gothis ex Illyrico profectis, Hunni successerunt, atque imprimis
Pannoniam tenuerunt. Neque enim Honorius viribus ad resistendum in tantis
difficultatibus destitutus, prorsus eos prohibere potuit, sed meliore
consilio, animo ad pacem converso, foedus cum eis, datis acceptisque
obsidibus fecit; ex quibus qui dati sunt, Ætius, qui etiam Alarico tributus
fuerat, præcipue memoratur_. How _Ætius_ was hostage to the _Goths_ and
_Hunns_ is related by _Frigeridus_, who when he had mentioned that
_Theodosius_ Emperor of the _East_ had sent grievous commands to _John_,
who after the death of _Honorius_ had usurped the crown of the _Western
Empire_, he subjoins: _Iis permotus Johannes, Ætium id tempus curam palatii
gerentem cum ingenti auri pondere ad Chunnos transmisit, notos sibi
obsidiatûs sui tempore & familiari amicitiâ devinctos_--And a little
after: _Ætius tribus annis Alarici obses, dehinc Chunnorum, postea
Carpilionis gener ex Comite domesticorum & Joannis curopalatæ._ Now
_Bucher_ shews that _Ætius_ was hostage to _Alaric_ till the year 410, when
_Alaric_ died, and to the _Hunns_ between the years 411 and 415, and
son-in-law to _Carpilio_ about the year 417 or 418, and _Curopalates_ to
_John_ about the end of the year 423. Whence 'tis probable that he became
hostage to the _Hunns_ about the year 412 or 413, when _Honorius_ made
leagues with almost all the barbarous nations, and granted them seats: but
I had rather say with _Sigonius_, that _Ætius_ became hostage to _Alaric_
A.C. 403. It is further manifest out of _Prosper_, that the _Hunns_ were in
quiet possession of _Pannonia_ in the year 432. For in the first book of
_Eusebius_'s Chronicle _Prosper_ writes: _Anno decimo post obitum Honorii,
cum ad Chunnorum gentem cui tunc Rugila præerat, post prælium cum Bonifacio
se Ætius contulisset, impetrato auxilio ad Romanorum solum regreditur._ And
in the second book: _Ætio & Valerio Coss. Ætius depositâ potestate profugus
ad Hunnos in Pannonia pervenit, quorum amicitiâ auxilioque usus, pacem
principum interpellatæ potestatis obtinuit._ Hereby it appears that at this
time _Rugila_, or as _Maximus_ calls him, _Rechilla_, reigned over the
_Hunns_ in _Pannonia_; and that _Pannonia_ was not now so much as accounted
within the soil of the Empire, being formerly granted away to the _Hunns_;
and that these were the very same body of _Hunns_ with which _Ætius_ had,
in the time of his being an hostage, contracted friendship: by virtue of
which, as he sollicited them before to the aid of _John_ the Tyrant A.C.
424, so now he procured their intercession for himself with the Emperor.
_Octar_ died A.C. 430; for _Socrates_ tells us, that about that time the
_Burgundians_ having been newly vext by the _Hunns_, upon intelligence of
_Octar_'s death, seeing them without a leader, set upon them suddenly with
so much vigour, that 3000 _Burgundians_ slew 10000 _Hunns_. Of _Rugila_'s
being now King in _Pannonia_ you have heard already. He died A.C. 433, and
was succeeded by _Bleda_, as _Prosper_ and _Maximus_ inform us. This
_Bleda_ with his brother _Attila_ were before this time Kings of the
_Hunns_ beyond the _Danube_, their father _Munzuc_'s kingdom being divided
between them; and now they united the kingdom _Pannonia_ to their own.
Whence _Paulus Diaconus_ saith, they did _regnum intra Pannoniam Daciamque
gerere_. In the year 441, they began to invade the Empire afresh, adding to
the _Pannonian_ forces new and great armies from _Scythia_. But this war
was presently composed, and then _Attila_, seeing _Bleda_ inclined to
peace, slew him, A.C. 444, inherited his dominions, and invaded the Empire
again. At length, after various great wars with the _Romans_, _Attila_
perished A.C. 454; and his sons quarrelling about his dominions, gave
occasion to the _Gepides_, _Ostrogoths_ and other nations who were their
subjects, to rebel and make war upon them. The same year the _Ostrogoths_
had seats granted them in _Pannonia_ by the Emperors _Marcian_ and
_Valentinian_; and with the _Romans_ ejected the _Hunns_ out of _Pannonia_,
soon after the death of _Attila_, as all historians agree. This ejection
was in the reign of _Avitus_, as is mentioned in the _Chronicum Boiorum_,
and in _Sidonius, Carm. 7 in Avitum_, which speaks thus of that Emperor.

  ----_Cujus solum amissas post sæcula multa_
  _Pannonias revocavit iter, jam credere promptum est._
  _Quid faciet bellis._

The Poet means, that by the coming of _Avitus_ the _Hunns_ yielded more
easily to the _Goths_. This was written by _Sidonius_ in the beginning of
the reign of _Avitus_: and his reign began in the end of the year 455, and
lasted not one full year.

_Jornandes_ tells us: _Duodecimo anno regni Valiæ, quando & Hunni post pene
quinquaginta annos invasa Pannonia, à Romanis & Gothis expulsi sunt._ And
_Marcellinus_: _Hierio & Ardaburio Coss. Pannoniæ, quæ per quinquaginta
annos ab Hunnis retinebantur, à Romanis receptæ sunt_: whence it should
seem that the _Hunns_ invaded and held _Pannonia_ from the year 378 or 379
to the year 427, and then were driven out of it. But this is a plain
mistake: for it is certain that the Emperor _Theodosius_ left the Empire
entire; and we have shewed out of _Prosper_, that the _Hunns_ were in quiet
possession of _Pannonia_ in the year 432. The _Visigoths_ in those days had
nothing to do with _Pannonia_, and the _Ostrogoths_ continued subject to
the _Hunns_ till the death of _Attila_, A.C. 454; and _Valia_ King of the
_Visigoths_ did not reign twelve years. He began his reign in the end of
the year 415, reigned three years, and was slain A.C. 419, as _Idacius_,
_Isidorus_, and the _Spanish_ manuscript Chronicles seen by _Grotius_
testify. And _Olympiodorus_, who carries his history only to the year 425,
sets down therein the death of _Valia_ King of the _Visigoths_, and
conjoins it with that of _Constantius_ which happened A.C. 420. Wherefore
the _Valia_ of _Jornandes_, who reigned at the least twelve years, is some
other King. And I suspect that this name hath been put by mistake for
_Valamir_ King of the _Ostrogoths_: for the action recorded was of the
_Romans_ and _Ostrogoths_ driving the _Hunns_ out of _Pannonia_ after the
death of _Attila_; and it is not likely that the historian would refer the
history of the _Ostrogoths_ to the years of the _Visigothic_ Kings. This
action happened in the end of the year 455, which I take to be the twelfth
year of _Valamir_ in _Pannonia_, and which was almost fifty years after the
year 406, in which the _Hunns_ succeeded the _Vandals_ and _Alans_ in
_Pannonia_. Upon the ceasing of the line of _Hunnimund_ the son of
_Hermaneric_, the _Ostrogoths_ lived without Kings of their own nation
about forty years together, being subject to the _Hunns_. And when _Alaric_
began to make war upon the _Romans_, which was in the year 444, he made
_Valamir_, with his brothers _Theodomir_ and _Videmir_ the grandsons of
_Vinethar_, captains or kings of these _Ostrogoths_ under him. In the
twelfth year of _Valamir_'s reign dated from thence, the _Hunns_ were
driven out of _Pannonia_.

Yet the _Hunns_ were not so ejected, but that they had further contests
with the _Romans_, till the head of _Denfix_ the son of _Attila_, was
carried to _Constantinople_, A.C. 469, in the Consulship of _Zeno_ and
_Marcian_, as _Marcellinus_ relates. Nor were they yet totally ejected the
Empire: for besides their reliques in _Pannonia_, _Sigonius_ tells us, that
when the Emperors _Marcian_ and _Valentinian_ granted _Pannonia_ to the
_Goths_, which was in the year 454, they granted part of _Illyricum_ to
some of the _Hunns_ and _Sarmatians_. And in the year 526, when the
_Lombards_ removing into _Pannonia_ made war there with the _Gepides_, the
_Avares_, a part of the _Hunns_, who had taken the name of _Avares_ from
one of their Kings, assisted the _Lombards_ in that war; and the _Lombards_
afterwards, when they went into _Italy_, left their seats in _Pannonia_ to
the _Avares_ in recompence of their friendship. From that time the _Hunns_
grew again very powerful; their Kings, whom they called _Chagan_, troubling
the Empire much in the reigns of the Emperors _Mauritius_, _Phocas_, and
_Heraclius_: and this is the original of the present kingdom of _Hungary_,
which from these _Avares_ and other _Hunns_ mixed together, took the name
of _Hun-Avaria_, and by contraction _Hungary_.

9. The _Lombards_, before they came over the _Danube_, were commanded by
two captains, _Ibor_ and _Ayon_: after whose death they had Kings,
_Agilmund_, _Lamisso_, _Lechu_, _Hildehoc_, _Gudehoc_, _Classo_, _Tato_,
_Wacho_, _Walter_, _Audoin_, _Alboin_, _Cleophis_, &c. _Agilmund_ was the
son of _Ayon_, who became their King, according to _Prosper_, in the
Consulship of _Honorius_ and _Theodosius_ A.C. 389, reigned thirty three
years, according to _Paulus Warnefridus_, and was slain in battle by the
_Bulgarians_. _Prosper_ places his death in the Consulship of _Marinianus_
and _Asclepiodorus_, A.C. 413. _Lamisso_ routed the _Bulgarians_, and
reigned three years, and _Lechu_ almost forty. _Gudehoc_ was contemporary
to _Odoacer_ King of the _Heruli_ in _Italy_, and led his people from
_Pannonia_ into _Rugia_, a country on the north side of _Noricum_ next
beyond the _Danube_; from whence _Odoacer_ then carried his people into
_Italy_. _Tato_ overthrew the kingdom of the _Heruli_ beyond the _Danube_.
_Wacho_ conquered the _Suevians_, a kingdom then bounded on the east by
_Bavaria_, on the west by _France_, and on the south by the _Burgundians_.
_Audoin_ returned into _Pannonia_ A.C. 526, and there overcame the
_Gepides_. _Alboin_ A.C. 551 overthrew the kingdom of the _Gepides_, and
slew their King _Chunnimund_: A.C. 563 he assisted the _Greek_ Emperor
against _Totila_ King of the _Ostrogoths_ in _Italy_; and A.C. 568 led his
people out of _Pannonia_ into _Lombardy_, where they reigned till the year
774.

According to _Paulus Diaconus_, the _Lombards_ with many other _Gothic_
nations came into the Empire from beyond the _Danube_ in the reign of
_Arcadius_ and _Honorius_, that is, between the years 395 and 408. But they
might come in a little earlier: for we are told that the _Lombards_, under
their captains _Ibor_ and _Ayon_, beat the _Vandals_ in battle; and
_Prosper_ placeth this victory in the Consulship of _Ausonius_ and
_Olybrius_, that is, A.C. 379. Before this war the _Vandals_ had remained
quiet forty years in the seats granted them in _Pannonia_ by _Constantine_
the great. And therefore if these were the same _Vandals_, this war must
have been in _Pannonia_; and might be occasioned by the coming of the
_Lombards_ over the _Danube_ into _Pannonia_, a year or two before the
battle; and so have put an end to that quiet which had lasted forty years.
After _Gratian_ and _Theodosius_ had quieted the _Barbarians_, they might
either retire over the _Danube_, or continue quiet under the _Romans_ till
the death of _Theodosius_; and then either invade the Empire anew, or throw
off all subjection to it. By their wars, first with the _Vandals_, and then
with the _Bulgarians_, a _Scythian_ nation so called from the river _Volga_
whence they came; it appears that even in those days they were a kingdom
not contemptible.

10. These nine kingdoms being rent away, we are next to consider the
residue of the _Western Empire_. While this Empire continued entire, it was
the Beast itself: but the residue thereof is only a part of it. Now if this
part be considered as a horn, the reign of this horn may be dated from the
translation of the imperial seat from _Rome_ to _Ravenna_, which was in
_October_ A.C. 408. For then the Emperor _Honorius_, fearing that _Alaric_
would besiege him in _Rome_, if he staid there, retired to _Millain_, and
thence to _Ravenna_: and the ensuing siege and sacking of _Rome_ confirmed
his residence there, so that he and his successors ever after made it their
home. Accordingly _Macchiavel_ in his _Florentine_ history writes, that
_Valentinian_ having left _Rome_, translated the seat of the Empire to
_Ravenna_.

_Rhætia_ belonged to the _Western_ Emperors, so long as that Empire stood;
and then it descended, with _Italy_ and the _Roman_ Senate, to _Odoacer_
King of the _Heruli_ in _Italy_, and after him to _Theoderic_ King of the
_Ostrogoths_ and his successors, by the grant of the _Greek_ Emperors. Upon
the death of _Valentinian_ the second, the _Alemans_ and _Suevians_ invaded
_Rhætia_ A.C. 455. But I do not find they erected any settled kingdom
there: for in the year 457, while they were yet depopulating _Rhætia_, they
were attacked and beaten by _Burto_ Master of the horse to the Emperor
_Majoranus_; and I hear nothing more of their invading _Rhætia_.
_Clodovæus_ King of _France_, in or about the year 496, conquered a kingdom
of the _Alemans_, and slew their last King _Ermeric_. But this kingdom was
seated in _Germany_, and only bordered upon _Rhætia_: for its people fled
from _Clodovæus_ into the neighbouring kingdom of the _Ostrogoths_ under
_Theoderic_, who received them as friends, and wrote a friendly letter to
_Clodovæus_ in their behalf: and by this means they became inhabitants of
_Rhætia_, as subjects under the dominion of the _Ostrogoths_.

When the _Greek_ Emperor conquered the _Ostrogoths_, he succeeded them in
the kingdom of _Ravenna_, not only by right of conquest but also by right
of inheritance, the _Roman_ Senate still going along with this kingdom.
Therefore we may reckon that this kingdom continued in the Exarchate of
_Ravenna_ and Senate of _Rome_: for the remainder of the _Western Empire_
went along with the Senate of _Rome_, by reason of the right which this
Senate still retained, and at length exerted, of chusing a new _Western_
Emperor.

I have now enumerated the ten kingdoms, into which the _Western Empire_
became divided at its first breaking, that is, at the time of _Rome_'s
being besieged and taken by the _Goths_. Some of these kingdoms at length
fell, and new ones arose: but whatever was their number afterwards, they
are still called the _Ten Kings_ from their first number.

Notes to Chap. VI.

[1] Apud Bucherum, l. 14. c. 9. n. 8.

[2] Rolevinc's Antiqua Saxon. l. 1. c. 6.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. VII.

_Of the eleventh horn of _Daniel_'s fourth Beast._

[1]_Now Daniel, considered the horns, and behold there came up among them
another horn, before whom there were three of the first horns pluckt up by
the roots; and behold in this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man, and a
mouth speaking great things,_--and [2] his _look was more stout than his
fellows,--and the same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against
them_: and one who stood by, and made _Daniel_ know the interpretation of
these things, told him, that [3] _the ten horns were ten kings that should
arise, and another should arise after them, and be diverse from the first,
and he should subdue three kings,_ [4] _and speak great words against the
most High, and wear out the saints, and think to change times and laws: and
that they should be given into his hands until a time and times and half a
time_. Kings are put for kingdoms, as above; and therefore the little horn
is a little kingdom. It was a horn of the fourth Beast, and rooted up three
of his first horns; and therefore we are to look for it among the nations
of the _Latin_ Empire, after the rise of the ten horns. But it was a
kingdom of a different kind from the other ten kingdoms, having a life or
soul peculiar to itself, with eyes and a mouth. By its eyes it was a Seer;
and by its mouth speaking great things and changing times and laws, it was
a Prophet as well as a King. And such a Seer, a Prophet and a King, is the
Church of _Rome_.

A Seer, [Greek: Episkopos], is a Bishop in the literal sense of the word;
and this Church claims the universal Bishoprick.

With his mouth he gives laws to kings and nations as an Oracle; and
pretends to Infallibility, and that his dictates are binding to the whole
world; which is to be a Prophet in the highest degree.

In the eighth century, by rooting up and subduing the Exarchate of
_Ravenna_, the kingdom of the _Lombards_, and the Senate and Dukedom of
_Rome_, he acquired _Peter_'s Patrimony out of their dominions; and thereby
rose up as a temporal Prince or King, or horn of the fourth Beast.

In a small book printed at _Paris_ A.C. 1689, entitled, _An historical
dissertation upon some coins of _Charles_ the great, _Ludovicus Pius_,
_Lotharius_, and their successors stamped at _Rome__, it is recorded, that
in the days of Pope _Leo_ X, there was remaining in the _Vatican_, and till
those days exposed to public view, an inscription in honour of _Pipin_ the
father of _Charles_ the great, in these words: _Pipinum pium, primum fuisse
qui amplificandæ Ecclesiæ Romanæ viam aperuerit, Exarchatu Ravennate, &
plurimis aliis oblatis_; "That _Pipin_ the pious was the first who opened a
way to the grandeur of the Church of _Rome_, conferring upon her the
Exarchate of _Ravenna_ and many other oblations." In and before the reign
of the Emperors _Gratian_ and _Theodosius_, the Bishop of _Rome_ lived
splendidly; but this was by the oblations of the _Roman_ Ladies, as
_Ammianus_ describes. After those reigns _Italy_ was invaded by foreign
nations, and did not get rid of her troubles before the fall of the kingdom
of _Lombardy_. It was certainly by the victory of the see of _Rome_ over
the _Greek_ Emperor, the King of _Lombardy_, and the Senate of _Rome_, that
she acquired _Peter_'s Patrimony, and rose up to her greatness. The
donation of _Constantine_ the Great is a fiction, and so is the donation of
the _Alpes Cottiæ_ to the Pope by _Aripert_ King of the _Lombards_: for the
_Alpes Cottiæ_ were a part of the Exarchate, and in the days of _Aripert_
belonged to the _Greek_ Emperor.

The invocation of the dead, and veneration of their images, being gradually
introduced in the 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th centuries, the _Greek_ Emperor
_Philippicus_ declared against the latter, A.C. 711 or 712. And [5] the
Emperor _Leo Isaurus_, to put a stop to it, called a meeting of Counsellors
and Bishops in his Palace, A.C. 726; and by their advice put out an Edict
against that worship, and wrote to Pope _Gregory_ II. that a general
Council might be called. But the Pope thereupon called a Council at _Rome_,
confirmed the worship of Images, excommunicated the _Greek_ Emperor,
absolved the people from their allegiance, and forbad them to pay tribute,
or otherwise be obedient to him. Then the people of _Rome_, _Campania_,
_Ravenna_ and _Pentapolis_, with the cities under them, revolted and laid
violent hands upon their magistrates, killing the Exarch _Paul_ at
_Ravenna_, and laying aside _Peter_ Duke of _Rome_ who was become blind:
and when _Exhileratus_ Duke of _Campania_ incited the people against the
Pope, the _Romans_ invaded _Campania_, and slew him with his son _Hadrian_.
Then a new Exarch, _Eutychius_, coming to _Naples_, sent some secretly to
take away the lives of the Pope and the Nobles of _Rome_: but the plot
being discovered, the _Romans_ revolted absolutely from the _Greek_
Emperor, and took an oath to preserve the life of the Pope, to defend his
state, and be obedient to his authority in all things. Thus _Rome_ with its
Duchy, including part of _Tuscany_ and part of _Campania_, revolted in the
year 726, and became a free state under the government of the Senate of
this city. The authority of the Senate in civil affairs was henceforward
absolute, the authority of the Pope extending hitherto no farther than to
the affairs of the Church only.

At that time [6] the _Lombards_ also being zealous for the worship of
images, and pretending to favour the cause of the Pope, invaded the cities
of the Exarchate: and at length, viz. A.C. 752, took _Ravenna_, and put an
end to the Exarchate. And this was the first of the three kingdoms which
fell before the little horn.

In the year 751 [7] Pope _Zechary_ deposed _Childeric_, a slothful and
useless King of _France_, and the last of the race of _Merovæus_; and
absolving his subjects from their oath of allegiance, gave the kingdom to
_Pipin_ the major of the Palace; and thereby made a new and potent friend.
His successor [8] Pope _Stephen_ III, knowing better how to deal with the
_Greek_ Emperor than with the _Lombards_, went the next year to the King of
the _Lombards_, to persuade him to return the Exarchate to the Emperor. But
this not succeeding, he went into _France_, and persuaded _Pipin_ to take
the Exarchate and _Pentapolis_ from the _Lombards_, and give it to St.
_Peter_. Accordingly _Pipin_ A.C. 754 came with an army into _Italy_, and
made _Aistulphus_ King of the _Lombards_ promise the surrender: but the
next year _Aistulphus_, on the contrary, to revenge himself on the Pope,
besieged the city of _Rome_. Whereupon the Pope sent letters to _Pipin_,
wherein he told him that if he came not speedily against the _Lombards_,
_pro data sibi potentia, alienandum fore à regno Dei & vita æterna_, he
should be excommunicated. _Pipin_ therefore, fearing a revolt of his
subjects, and being indebted to the Church of _Rome_, came speedily with an
army into _Italy_, raised the siege, besieged the _Lombards_ in _Pavia_,
and forced them to surrender the Exarchate and region of _Pentapolis_ to
the Pope for a perpetual possession. Thus the Pope became Lord of
_Ravenna_, and the Exarchate, some few cities excepted; and the keys were
sent to _Rome_, and laid upon the confession of St. _Peter_, that is, upon
his tomb at the high Altar, _in signum veri perpetuique dominii, sed
pietate Regis gratuita_, as the inscription of a coin of _Pipin_ hath it.
This was in the year of Christ 755. And henceforward the Popes being
temporal Princes, left off in their Epistles and Bulls to note the years of
the _Greek_ Emperors, as they had hitherto done.

After this [9] the _Lombards_ invading the Pope's countries, Pope _Adrian_
sent to _Charles_ the great, the son and successor of _Pipin_, to come to
his assistance. Accordingly _Charles_ entered _Italy_ with an army, invaded
the _Lombards_, overthrew their kingdom, became master of their countries,
and restored to the Pope, not only what they had taken from him, but also
the rest of the Exarchate which they had promised _Pipin_ to surrender to
him, but had hitherto detained; and also gave him some cities of the
_Lombards_, and was in return himself made _Patricius_ by the _Romans_, and
had the authority of confirming the elections of the Popes conferred upon
him. These things were done in the years 773 and 774. This kingdom of the
_Lombards_ was the second kingdom which fell before the little horn. But
_Rome_, which was to be the seat of his kingdom, was not yet his own.

In the year 796, [10] _Leo_ III being made Pope, notified his election to
_Charles_ the great by his Legates, sending to him for a present, the
golden keys of the Confession of _Peter_, and the Banner of the city of
_Rome_: the first as an acknowledgment of the Pope's holding the cities of
the Exarchate and _Lombardy_ by the grant of _Charles_; the other as a
signification that _Charles_ should come and subdue the Senate and people
of _Rome_, as he had done the Exarchate and the kingdom of the _Lombards_.
For the Pope at the same time desired _Charles_ to send some of his Princes
to _Rome_, who might subject the _Roman_ people to him, and bind them by
oath _in fide & subjectione_, in fealty and subjection, as his words are
recited by _Sigonius_. An anonymous Poet, publish'd by _Boeclerus_ at
_Strasburg_, expresseth it thus:

  _Admonuitque piis precibus, qui mittere vellet_
  _Ex propriis aliquos primoribus, ac sibi plebem_
  _Subdere Romanam, servandaque foedera cogens_
  _Hanc fidei sacramentis promittere magnis_.

Hence arose a misunderstanding between the Pope and the city: and the
_Romans_ about two or three years after, by assistance of some of the
Clergy, raised such tumults against him, as gave occasion to a new state of
things in all the _West_. For two of the Clergy accused him of crimes, and
the _Romans_ with an armed force, seized him, stript him of his sacerdotal
habit, and imprisoned him in a monastery. But by assistance of his friends
he made his escape, and fled into _Germany_ to _Charles_ the great, to whom
he complained of the _Romans_ for acting against him out of a design to
throw off all authority of the Church, and to recover their antient
freedom. In his absence his accusers with their forces ravaged the
possessions of the Church, and sent the accusations to _Charles_; who
before the end of the year sent the Pope back to _Rome_ with a large
retinue. The Nobles and Bishops of _France_ who accompanied him, examined
the chief of his accusers at _Rome_, and sent them into _France_ in
custody. This was in the year 799. The next year _Charles_ himself went to
_Rome_, and upon a day appointed presided in a Council of _Italian_ and
_French_ Bishops to hear both parties. But when the Pope's adversaries
expected to be heard, the Council declared [11] that he who was the supreme
judge of all men, was above being judged by any other than himself:
whereupon he made a solemn declaration of his innocence before all the
people, and by doing so was looked upon as acquitted.

Soon after, upon _Christmas_-day, the people of _Rome_, who had hitherto
elected their Bishop, and reckoned that they and their Senate inherited the
rights of the antient Senate and people of _Rome_, voted _Charles_ their
Emperor, and subjected themselves to him in such manner as the old _Roman_
Empire and their Senate were subjected to the old _Roman_ Emperors. The
Pope crowned him, and anointed him with holy oil, and worshipped him on his
knees after the manner of adoring the old _Roman_ Emperors; as the
aforesaid Poet thus relates:

  _Post laudes igitur dictas & summus eundem_
  _Præsul adoravit, sicut mos debitus olim_
  _Principibus fuit antiquis_.

The Emperor, on the other hand, took the following oath to the Pope: _In
nomine Christi spondeo atque polliceor, Ego Carolus Imperator coram Deo &
beato Petro Apostolo, me protectorem ac defensorem fore hujus sanctæ Romanæ
Ecclesiæ in omnibus utilitatibus, quatenùs divino fultus fuero adjutorio,
prout sciero poteroque_. The Emperor was also made Consul of _Rome_, and
his son _Pipin_ crowned King of _Italy_: and henceforward the Emperor
stiled himself: _Carolus serenissimus, Augustus, à Deo coronatus, magnus,
pacificus, Romæ gubernans imperium_, or _Imperator Romanorum_; and was
prayed for in the Churches of _Rome_. His image was henceforward put upon
the coins of _Rome_: while the enemies of the Pope, to the number of three
hundred _Romans_ and two or three of the Clergy, were sentenced to death.
The three hundred _Romans_ were beheaded in one day in the _Lateran_
fields: but the Clergymen at the intercession of the Pope were pardoned,
and banished into _France_. And thus the title of _Roman_ Emperor, which
had hitherto been in the _Greek_ Emperors, was by this act transferred in
the _West_ to the Kings of _France_.

After these things [12] _Charles_ gave the City and Duchy of _Rome_ to the
Pope, subordinately to himself as Emperor of the _Romans_; spent the winter
in ordering the affairs of _Rome_, and those of the Apostolic see, and of
all _Italy_, both civil and ecclesiastical, and in making new laws for
them; and returned the next summer into _France_: leaving the city under
its Senate, and both under the Pope and himself. But hearing that his new
laws were not observed by the judges in dictating the law, nor by the
people in hearing it; and that the great men took servants from free men,
and from the Churches and Monasteries, to labour in their vineyards,
fields, pastures and houses, and continued to exact cattle and wine of
them, and to oppress those that served the Churches: he wrote to his son
_Pipin_ to remedy these abuses, to take care of the Church, and see his
laws executed.

Now the Senate and people and principality of _Rome_ I take to be the third
King the little horn overcame, and even the chief of the three. For this
people elected the Pope and the Emperor; and now, by electing the Emperor
and making him Consul, was acknowledged to retain the authority of the old
_Roman_ Senate and people. This city was the Metropolis of the old _Roman_
Empire, represented in _Daniel_ by the fourth Beast; and by subduing the
Senate and people and Duchy, it became the Metropolis of the little horn of
that Beast, and completed _Peter_'s Patrimony, which was the kingdom of
that horn. Besides, this victory was attended with greater consequences
than those over the other two Kings. For it set up the _Western Empire_,
which continues to this day. It set up the Pope above the judicature of the
_Roman_ Senate, and above that of a Council of _Italian_ and _French_
Bishops, and even above all human judicature; and gave him the supremacy
over the _Western_ Churches and their Councils in a high degree. It gave
him _a look more stout than his fellows_; so that when this new religion
began to be established in the minds of men, he grappled not only with
Kings, but even with the _Western_ Emperor himself. It is observable also,
that the custom of kissing the Pope's feet, an honour superior to that of
Kings and Emperors, began about this time. There are some instances of it
in the ninth century: _Platina_ tells us, that the feet of Pope _Leo_ IV
were kissed, according to antient custom, by all who came to him: and some
say that _Leo_ III began this custom, pretending that his hand was infected
by the kiss of a woman. The Popes began also about this time to canonize
saints, and to grant indulgences and pardons: and some represent that _Leo_
III was the first author of all these things. It is further observable,
that _Charles_ the great, between the years 775 and 796, conquered all
_Germany_ from the _Rhine_ and _Danube_ northward to the _Baltic_ sea, and
eastward to the river _Teis_; extending his conquests also into _Spain_ as
far as the river _Ebro_: and by these conquests he laid the foundation of
the new Empire; and at the same time propagated the _Roman_ Catholic
religion into all his conquests, obliging the _Saxons_ and _Hunns_ who were
heathens, to receive the _Roman_ faith, and distributing his northern
conquests into Bishopricks, granting tithes to the Clergy and _Peter-pence_
to the Pope: by all which the Church of _Rome_ was highly enlarged,
enriched, exalted, and established.

In the forementioned _dissertation upon some coins of _Charles_ the great,
_Ludovicus Pius_, _Lotharius_, and their successors, stamped at _Rome__,
there is a draught of a piece of _Mosaic_ work which Pope _Leo_ III. caused
to be made in his Palace near the Church of _John Lateran_, in memory of
his sending the standard or banner of the city of _Rome_ curiously wrought,
to _Charles_ the great; and which still remained there at the publishing of
the said book. In the _Mosaic_ work there appeared _Peter_ with three keys
in his lap, reaching the _Pallium_ to the Pope with his right hand, and the
banner of the city to _Charles_ the great with his left. By the Pope was
this inscription, SCISSIMUS D.N. LEO PP; by the King this, D.N. CARVLO
REGI; and under the feet of _Peter_ this, BEATE PETRE, DONA VITAM LEONI PP,
ET BICTORIAM CARVLO REGI DONA. This Monument gives the title of King to
_Charles_, and therefore was erected before he was Emperor. It was erected
when _Peter_ was reaching the _Pallium_ to the Pope, and the Pope was
sending the banner of the city to _Charles_, that is, A.C. 796. The words
above, _Sanctissimus Dominus noster Leo Papa Domino nostro Carolo Regi_,
relate to the message; and the words below, _Beate Petre, dona vitam Leoni
Papæ & victoriam Carolo regi dona_, are a prayer that in this undertaking
God would preserve the life of the Pope, and give victory to the King over
the _Romans_. The three keys in the lap of _Peter_ signify the keys of the
three parts of his Patrimony, that of _Rome_ with its Duchy, which the Pope
claimed and was conquering, those of _Ravenna_ with the Exarchate, and of
the territories taken from the _Lombards_; both which he had newly
conquered. These were the three dominions, whose keys were in the lap of
St. _Peter_, and whose Crowns are now worn by the Pope, and by the conquest
of which he became the little horn of the fourth Beast. By _Peter_'s giving
the _Pallium_ to the Pope with his right hand, and the banner of the city
to the King with his left, and by naming the Pope before the King in the
inscription, may be understood that the Pope was then reckoned superior in
dignity to the Kings of the earth.

After the death of _Charles_ the great, his son and successor _Ludovicus
Pius_, at the request of the Pope, [13] confirmed the donations of his
grandfather and father to the see of _Rome_. And in the confirmation he
names first _Rome_ with its Duchy extending into _Tuscany_ and _Campania_;
then the Exarchate of _Ravenna_, with _Pentapolis_; and in the third place,
the territories taken from the _Lombards_. These are his three conquests,
and he was to hold them of the Emperor for the use of the Church _sub
integritate_, entirely, without the Emperor's medling therewith, or with
the jurisdiction or power of the Pope therein, unless called thereto in
certain cases. This ratification the Emperor _Ludovicus_ made under an
oath: and as the King of the _Ostrogoths_, for acknowledging that he held
his kingdom of _Italy_ of the _Greek_ Emperor, stamped the effigies of the
Emperor on one side of his coins and his own on the reverse; so the Pope
made the like acknowledgment to the _Western_ Emperor. For the Pope began
now to coin money, and the coins of _Rome_ are henceforward found with the
heads of the Emperors, _Charles_, _Ludovicus Pius_, _Lotharius_, and their
successors, on the one side, and the Pope's inscription on the reverse, for
many years.

Notes to Chap. VII.

[1] Chap. vii. 8.

[2] Ver. 20, 21.

[3] Ver. 24.

[4] Ver. 25.

[5] Sigonius de Regno Italiæ, ad Ann. 726.

[6] Sigonius ib. ad Ann. 726, 752.

[7] Sigon. ib. Ann. 750.

[8] Sigon. ib. Ann. 753, 754, 755.

[9] Sigon. ib. Ann. 773.

[10] Sigon. de Regno Ital. ad Ann. 796.

[11] Vide Anastasium.

[12] Sigon. de Regno Ital.

[13] Confirmationem recitat Sigonius, lib. 4. de Regno Italiæ, ad An. 817.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. VIII.

_Of the power of the eleventh horn of _Daniel_'s fourth Beast, to change
times and laws_.

In the reign of the _Greek_ Emperor _Justinian_, and again in the reign of
_Phocas_, the Bishop of _Rome_ obtained some dominion over the _Greek_
Churches, but of no long continuance. His standing dominion was only over
the nations of the _Western Empire_, represented by _Daniel_'s fourth
Beast. And this jurisdiction was set up by the following Edict of the
Emperors _Gratian_ and _Valentinian.--[1] Volumus ut quicunque judicio
Damasi, quod ille cum Concilio quinque vel septem habuerit Episcoporum, vel
eorum qui Catholici sunt judicio vel Concilio condemnatus fuerit, si juste
voluerit Ecclesiam retentare, ut qui ad sacerdotale judicium per
contumeliam non ivisset: ut ab illustribus viris Præfectis Prætorio Galliæ
atque Italiæ, authoritate adhibitâ, ad Episcopale judicium remittatur, sive
à Consularibus vel Vicariis, ut ad Urbem Romam sub prosecutione perveniat.
Aut si in longinquioribus partibus alicujus ferocitas talis emerserit,
omnis ejus causæ edictio ad Metropolitæ in eadem Provincia Episcopi
deduceretur examen. Vel si ipse Metropolitanus est, Romam necessariò, vel
ad eos quos Romanus Episcopus judices dederit, sine delatione
contendat.----Quod si vel Metropolitani Episcopi vel cujuscunque sacerdotis
iniquitas est suspecta, aut gratia; ad Romanum Episcopum, vel ad Concilium
quindecim finitimorum Episcoporum accersitum liceat provocare; modo ne post
examen habitum, quod definitum fuerit, integretur_. This Edict wanting the
name of both _Valens_ and _Theodosius_ in the Title, was made in the time
between their reigns, that is, in the end of the year 378, or the beginning
of 379. It was directed to the _Præfecti Prætorio Italiæ & Galliæ_, and
therefore was general. For the _Præfectus Prætorio Italiæ_ governed
_Italy_, _Illyricum occidentale_ and _Africa_; and the _Præfectus Prætorio
Galliæ_ governed _Gallia_, _Spain_, and _Britain_.

The granting of this jurisdiction to the Pope gave several Bishops occasion
to write to him for his resolutions upon doubtful cases, whereupon he
answered by decretal Epistles; and henceforward he gave laws to the
_Western_ Churches by such Epistles. _Himerius_ Bishop of _Tarraco_, the
head city of a province in _Spain_, writing to Pope _Damasus_ for his
direction about certain Ecclesiastical matters, and the Letter not arriving
at _Rome_ till after the death of _Damasus_, A.C. 384; his successor
_Siricius_ answered the same with a legislative authority, telling him of
one thing: _Cum hoc fieri--missa ad Provincias à venerandæ memoriæ
prædecessore meo Liberio generalia decreta, prohibeant_. Of another:
_Noverint se ab omni ecclesiastico honore, quo indignè usi sunt, Apostolicæ
Sedis auctoritate, dejectos_. Of another: _Scituri posthac omnium
Provinciarum summi Antistites, quod si ultrò ad sacros ordines quenquam de
talibus esse assumendum, & de suo & de aliorum statu, quos contra Canones &
interdicta nostra provexerint, congruam ab Apostolica Sede promendam esse
sententiam_. And the Epistle he concludes thus: _Explicuimus, ut arbitror,
frater charissime, universa quæ digesta sunt in querelam; & ad singulas
causas, de quibus ad Romanam Ecclesiam, utpote ad caput tui corporis,
retulisti; sufficientia, quantum opinor, responsa reddidimus. Nunc
fraternitatis tuæ animum ad servandos canones, & tenenda decretalia
constituta, magis ac magis incitamus: ad hæc quæ ad tua consulta
rescripsimus in omnium Coepiscoporum perferri facias notionem; & non solum
corum, qui in tua sunt dioecesi constituti, sed etiam ad universos
Carthaginenses ac Boeticos, Lusitanos atque [2] Gallicos, vel eos qui
vicinis tibi collimitant hinc inde Provinciis, hæc quæ a nobis sunt salubri
ordinatione disposita, sub literarum tuarum prosecutione mittantur. Et
quanquam statuta sedis Apostolicæ vel Canonum venerabilia definita, nulli
Sacerdotum Domini ignorare sit liberum: utilius tamen, atque pro
antiquitate sacerdotii tui, dilectioni tuæ esse admodùm poterit gloriosum,
si ea quæ ad te speciali nomine generaliter scripta sunt, per unanimitatis
tuæ sollicitudinem in universorum fratrum nostrorum notitiam perferantur;
quatenus & quæ à nobis non inconsultè sed providè sub nimia cautela &
deliberatione sunt salubriter constituta, intemerata permaneant, & omnibus
in posterum excusationibus aditus, qui jam nulli apud nos patere poterit,
obstruatur. Dat. 3 Id. Febr. Arcadio & Bautone viris clarissimis
Consulibus_, A.C. 385. Pope _Liberius_ in the reign of _Jovian_ or
_Valentinian_ I. sent general Decrees to the Provinces, ordering that the
_Arians_ should not be rebaptized: and this he did in favour of the Council
of _Alexandria_, that nothing more should be required of them than to
renounce their opinions. Pope _Damasus_ is said to have decreed in a
_Roman_ Council, that _Tithes_ and _Tenths_ should be paid upon pain of an
_Anathema_; and that _Glory be to the Father_, &c. should be said or sung
at the end of the _Psalms_. But the first decretal Epistle now extant is
this of _Siricius_ to _Himerius_; by which the Pope made _Himerius_ his
Vicar over all _Spain_ for promulging his Decrees, and seeing them
observed. The Bishop of _Sevill_ was also the Pope's Vicar sometimes; for
_Simplicius_ wrote thus to _Zeno_ Bishop of that place: _Talibus idcirco
gloriantes indiciis, congruum duximus vicariâ Sedis nostræ te auctoritate
fulciri: cujus vigore munitus, Apostolicæ institutionis Decreta, vel
sanctorum terminos Patrum, nullatenus transcendi permittas_. And Pope
_Hormisda_ [3] made the Bishop of _Sevill_ his Vicar over _Boetica_ and
_Lusitania_, and the Bishop of _Tarraco_ his Vicar over all the rest of
_Spain_, as appears by his Epistles to them.

Pope _Innocent_ the first, in his decretal Epistle to _Victricius_ Bishop
of _Rouen_ in _France_, A.C. 404, in pursuance of the Edict of _Gratian_,
made this Decree: _Si quæ autem causæ vel contentiones inter Clericos tam
superioris ordinis quam etiam inferioris fuerint exortæ; ut secundum
Synodum Nicenam congregatis ejusdem Provinciæ Episcopis jurgium terminetur:
nec alicui liceat, [4] Romanæ Ecclesiæ, cujus in omnibus causis debet
reverentia custodiri, relictis his sacerdotibus, qui in eadem Provincia Dei
Ecclesiam nutu Divino gubernant, ad alias convolare Provincias. Quod siquis
fortè præsumpserit; & ab officio Clericatûs summotus, & injuriarum reus
judicetur. Si autem majores causæ in medium fuerint devolutæ, ad Sedem
Apostolicam sicut Synodus statuit, & beata consuetudo exigit, post judicium
Episcopale referantur_. By these Letters it seems to me that _Gallia_ was
now subject to the Pope, and had been so for some time, and that the Bishop
of _Rouen_ was then his Vicar or one of them: for the Pope directs him to
refer the greater causes to the See of _Rome_, according to custom. But the
Bishop of _Arles_ soon after became the Pope's Vicar over all _Gallia_: for
Pope _Zosimus_, A.C. 417, ordaining that none should have access to him
without the credentials of his Vicars, conferred upon _Patroclus_ the
Bishop of _Arles_ this authority over all _Gallia_, by the following
Decree.

_Zosimus universis Episcopis per Gallias & septem
Provincias constitutis_.

_Placuit Apostolicæ Sedi, ut siquis ex qualibet Galliarum parte sub
quolibet ecclesiastico gradu ad nos Romæ venire contendit, vel aliò
terrarum ire disponit, non aliter proficiscatur nisi Metropolitani Episcopi
Formatas acceperit, quibus sacerdotium suum vel locum ecclesiasticum quem
habet, scriptorum ejus adstipulatione perdoceat: quod ex gratia statuimus
quia plures episcopi sive presbyteri sive ecclesiastici simulantes, quia
nullum documentum Formatarum extat per quod valeant confutari, in nomen
venerationis irrepunt, & indebitam reverentiam promerentur. Quisquis
igitur, fratres charissimi, prætermissà supradicti Formatâ sive episcopus,
sive presbyter, sive diaconus, aut deinceps inferiori gradu sit, ad nos
venerit: sciat se omnino suscipi non posse. Quam auctoritatem ubique nos
misisse manifestum est, ut cunctis regionibus innotescat id quod statuimus
omnimodis esse servandum. Siquis autem hæc salubriter constituta temerare
tentaverit sponte suâ, se a nostra noverit communione discretum. Hoc autem
privilegium Formatarum sancto Patroclo fratri & coepiscopo nostro,
meritorum ejus speciali contemplatione, concessimus_. And that the Bishop
of _Arles_ was sometimes the Pope's Vicar over all _France_, is affirmed
also by all the Bishops of the Diocess of _Arles_ in their Letter to Pope
_Leo_ I. _Cui id etiam honoris dignitatisque collatum est_, say they, _ut
non tantum has Provincias potestate propriâ gubernaret; verum etiam omnes
Gallias sibi Apostolicæ Sedis vice mandatas, sub omni ecclesiastica regula
contineret_. And Pope _Pelagius_ I. A.C. 556, in his Epistle to _Sapaudus_
Bishop of _Arles_: _Majorum nostrorum, operante Dei misericordiâ, cupientes
inhærere vestigiis & eorum actus divino examine in omnibus imitari:
Charitati tuæ per universam Galliam, sanctæ Sedis Apostolicæ, cui divinâ
gratiâ præsidemus, vices injungimus_.

By the influence of the same imperial Edict, not only _Spain_ and _Gallia_,
but also _Illyricum_ became subject to the Pope. _Damasus_ made
_Ascholius_, or _Acholius_, Bishop of _Thessalonica_ the Metropolis of
_Oriental Illyricum_, his Vicar for hearing of causes; and in the year 382,
_Acholius_ being summoned by Pope _Damasus_, came to a Council at _Rome_.
Pope _Siricius_ the successor of _Damasus_, decreed that no Bishop should
be ordained in _Illyricum_ without the consent of _Anysius_ the successor
of _Acholius_. And the following Popes gave _Rufus_ the successor of
_Anysius_, a power of calling Provincial Councils: for in the Collections
of _Holstenius_ there is an account of a Council of _Rome_ convened under
Pope _Boniface_ II. in which were produced Letters of _Damasus_,
_Syricius_, _Innocent_ I. _Boniface_ I. and _Cælestine_ Bishops of _Rome_,
to _Ascholius_, _Anysius_ and _Rufus_, Bishops of _Thessalonica_: in which
Letters they commend to them the hearing of causes in _Illyricum_, granted
by the Lord and the holy Canons to the Apostolic See thro'out that
Province. And Pope _Siricius_ saith in his Epistle to _Anysius_: _Etiam
dudum, frater charissime, per Candidianum Episcopum, qui nos præcessit ad
Dominum, hujusmodi literas dederamus, ut nulla licentia esset, sine
consensu tuo in Illyrico Episcopos ordinare præsumere, quæ utrum ad te
pervenerint scire non potui. Multa enim gesta sunt per contentionem ab
Episcopis in ordinationibus faciendis, quod tua melius caritas novit_. And
a little after: _Ad omnem enim hujusmodi audaciam comprimendam vigilare
debet instantia tua, Spiritu in te Sancto fervente: ut vel ipse, si potes,
vel quos judicaveris Episcopos idoneos, cum literis dirigas, dato consensu
qui possit, in ejus locum qui defunctus vel depositus fuerit, Catholicum
Episcopum vitâ & moribus probatum, secundum Nicænæ Synodi statuta vel
Ecclesiæ Romanæ, Clericum de Clero meritum ordinare_. And Pope _Innocent_
I. saith in his Epistle to _Anysius_: _Cui_ [Anysio] _etiam anteriores
tanti ac tales viri prædecessores mei Episcopi, id est, sanctæ memoriæ
Damasus, Siricius, atque supra memoratus vir ita detulerunt; ut omnia quæ
in omnibus illis partibus gererentur, Sanctitati tuæ, quæ plena justitiæ
est, traderent cognoscenda_. And in his Epistle to _Rufus_ the successor of
_Anysius_: _Ita longis intervallis disterminatis à me ecclesiis discat
consulendum; ut prudentiæ gravitatique tuæ committendam curam causasque,
siquæ exoriantur, per Achaiæ, Thessaliæ, Epiri veteris, Epiri novæ, &
Cretæ, Daciæ mediterraneæ, Daciæ ripensis, Moesiæ, Dardaniæ, & Prævali
ecclesias, Christo Domino annuente, censeam. Verè enim ejus sacratissimis
monitis lectissimæ sinceritatis tuæ providentiæ & virtuti hanc injungimus
sollicitudinem: non primitùs hæc statuentes, sed Præcessores nostros
Apostolicos imitati, qui beatissimis Acholio & Anysio injungi pro meritis
ista voluerunt_. And _Boniface_ I. in his decretal Epistle to _Rufus_ and
the rest of the Bishops in _Illyricum_: _Nullus, ut frequenter dixi,
alicujus ordinationem citra ejus_ [Episcopi Thessalonicensis] _conscientiam
celebrare præsumat: cui, ut supra dictum est, vice nostrâ cuncta
committimus_. And Pope _Cælestine_, in his decretal Epistle to the Bishops
thro'out _Illyricum_, saith: _Vicem nostram per vestram Provinciam
noveritis_ [Rufo] _esse commissam, ita ut ad eum, fratres carissimi,
quicquid de causis agitur, referatur. Sine ejus consilio nullus ordinetur.
Nullus usurpet, eodem inconscio, commissam illi Provinciam; colligere nisi
cum ejus voluntate Episcopus non præsumat_. And in the cause of
_Perigenes_, in the title of his Epistle, he thus enumerates the Provinces
under this Bishop: _Rufo & cæteris Episcopis per Macedoniam, Achaiam,
Thessaliam, Epirum veterem, Epirum novam, Prævalin, & Daciam constitutis_.
And Pope _Xistus_ in a decretal Epistle to the same Bishops: _Illyricanæ
omnes Ecclesiæ, ut à decessoribus nostris recepimus, & nos quoque fecimus,
ad curam nunc pertinent Thessalonicensis Antistitis, ut suâ sollicitudine,
siquæ inter fratres nascantur, ut assolent, actiones distinguat atque
definiat; & ad eum, quicquid à singulis sacerdotibus agitur, referatur. Sit
Concilium, quotiens causæ fuerint, quotiens ille pro necessitatum
emergentium ratione decreverit_. And Pope _Leo_ I. in his decretal Epistle
to _Anastasius_ Bishop of _Thessalonica_: _Singulis autem Metropolitanis
sicut potestas ista committitur, ut in suis Provinciis jus habeant
ordinandi; ita eos Metropolitanos à te volumus ordinari; maturo tamen &
decocto judicio_.

_Occidental Illyricum_ comprehended _Pannonia prima_ and _secunda_,
_Savia_, _Dalmatia_, _Noricum mediterraneum_, and _Noricum ripense_; and
its Metropolis was _Sirmium_, till _Attila_ destroyed this city. Afterwards
_Laureacum_ became the Metropolis of _Noricum_ and both _Pannonias_, and
_Salona_ the Metropolis of _Dalmatia_. Now [5] the Bishops of _Laureacum_
and _Salona_ received the _Pallium_ from the Pope: and _Zosimus_, in his
decretal Epistle to _Hesychius_ Bishop of _Salona_, directed him to
denounce the Apostolic decrees as well to the Bishops of his own, as to
those of the neighbouring Provinces. The subjection of these Provinces to
the See of _Rome_ seems to have begun in _Anemius_, who was ordained Bishop
of _Sirmium_ by _Ambrose_ Bishop of _Millain_, and who in the Council of
_Aquileia_ under Pope _Damasus_, A.C. 381, declared his sentence in these
words: _Caput Illyrici non nisi civitas Sirmiensis: Ego igitur illius
civitatis Episcopus sum. Eum qui non confitetur filium Dei æternum, &
coeternum patri, qui est sempiternus, anathema dico_. The next year
_Anemius_ and _Ambrose_, with _Valerian_ Bishop of _Aquileia_, _Acholias_
Bishop of _Thessalonica,_ and many others, went to the Council of _Rome_,
which met for overruling the _Greek_ Church by majority of votes, and
exalting the authority of the Apostolic See, as was attempted before in the
Council of _Sardica_.

_Aquileia_ was the second city of the _Western Empire_, and by some called
the second _Rome_. It was the Metropolis of _Istria_, _Forum Julium_, and
_Venetia_; and its subjection to the See of _Rome_ is manifest by the
decretal Epistle of _Leo_ I. directed to _Nicetas_ Bishop of this city; for
the Pope begins his Epistle thus: _Regressus ad nos filius meus Adeodatus
Diaconus Sedis nostræ, dilectionem tuam poposcisse memorat, ut de his à
nobis authoritatem Apostolicæ Sedis acciperes, quæ quidem magnam
difficultatem dijudicationis videntur afferre_. Then he sets down an answer
to the questions proposed by _Nicetas_, and concludes thus: _Hanc autem
Epistolam nostram, quam ad consultationem tuæ fraternitatis emisimus, ad
omnes fratres & comprovinciales tuos Episcopos facies pervenire, ut in
omnium observantia, data profit authoritas. Data 1-2 Kal. Apr. Majorano
Aug. Cos._ A.C. 458. _Gregory_ the great A.C. 591, [6] cited _Severus_
Bishop of _Aquileia_ to appear before him in judgment in a Council at
_Rome_.

The Bishops of _Aquileia_ and _Millain_ created one another, and therefore
were of equal authority, and alike subject to the See of _Rome_. Pope
_Pelagius_ about the year 557, testified this in the following words: [7]
_Mos antiquus fuit_, saith he, _ut quia pro longinquitate vel difficultate
itineris, ab Apostolico illis onerosum fuerit ordinari, ipsi se invicem
Mediolanensis & Aquileiensis ordinare Episcopos debuissent_. These words
imply that the ordination of these two Bishops belonged to the See of
_Rome_. When _Laurentius_ Bishop of _Millain_ had excommunicated _Magnus_,
one of his Presbyters, and was dead, [8] _Gregory_ the great absolved
_Magnus_, and sent the _Pallium_ to the new elected Bishop _Constantius_;
whom the next year [9] he reprehended of partiality in judging
_Fortunatus_, and commanded him to send _Fortunatus_ to _Rome_ to be judged
there: four years after [10] he appointed the Bishops of _Millain_ and
_Ravenna_ to hear the cause of one _Maximus_; and two years after, viz.
A.C. 601, when _Constantius_ was dead, and the people of _Millain_ had
elected _Deusdedit_ his successor, and the _Lombards_ had elected another,
[11] _Gregory_ wrote to the Notary, Clergy, and People of _Millain_, that
by the authority of his Letters _Deusdedit_ should be ordained, and that he
whom the _Lombards_ had ordained was an unworthy successor of _Ambrose_:
whence I gather, that the Church of _Millain_ had continued in this state
of subordination to the See of _Rome_ ever since the days of _Ambrose_; for
_Ambrose_ himself acknowledged the authority of that See. _Ecclesia
Romana_, [12] saith he, _hanc consuetudinem non habet, cujus typum in
omnibus sequimur, & formam_. And a little after: _In omnibus cupio sequi
Ecclesiam Romanam_. And in his Commentary upon 1 _Tim_. iii. _Cum totus
mundus Dei sit, tamen domus ejus Ecclesia dicitur, cujus hodie rector est
Damasus_. In his Oration on the death of his brother _Satyrus_, he relates
how his brother coming to a certain city of _Sardinia_, _advocavit
Episcopum loci, percontatusque est ex eo utrum cum Episcopis Catholicis hoc
est cum Romana Ecclesia conveniret?_ And in conjunction with the Synod of
_Aquileia_ A.C. 381, in a synodical Epistle to the Emperor _Gratian_, he
saith: _Totius orbis Romani caput Romanam Ecclesiam, atque illam
sacrosanctam Apostolorum fidem, ne turbari sineret, obsecranda fuit
clementia vestra; inde enim in omnes venerandæ communionis jura dimanant_.
The Churches therefore of _Aquileia_ and _Millain_ were subject to the See
of _Rome_ from the days of the Emperor _Gratian_. _Auxentius_ the
predecessor of _Ambrose_ was not subject to the see of _Rome_, and
consequently the subjection of the Church of _Millain_ began in _Ambrose_.
This Diocese of _Millain_ contained _Liguria_ with _Insubria_, the _Alpes
Cottiæ_ and _Rhætia_; and was divided from the Diocese of _Aquileia_ by the
river _Addua_. In the year 844, the Bishop of _Millain_ broke off from the
See of _Rome_, and continued in this separation about 200 years, as is thus
related by [13] _Sigonius_: _Eodem anno Angilbertus Mediolanensis
Archiepiscopus ab Ecclesia Romana parum comperta de causa descivit,
tantumque exemplo in posterum valuit, ut non nisi post ducentos annos
Ecclesia Mediolanensis ad Romanæ obedientiam auctoritatemque redierit_.

The Bishop of _Ravenna_, the Metropolis of _Flaminia_ and _Æmilia_, was
also subject to the Pope: for _Zosimus_, A.C. 417, excommunicated some of
the Presbyters of that Church, and wrote a commonitory Epistle about them
to the Clergy of that Church as a branch of the _Roman_ Church: _In sua_,
saith he, _hoc est, in Ecclesia nostra Romana_. When those of _Ravenna_,
having elected a new Bishop, gave notice thereof to Pope _Sixtus_, the Pope
set him aside, and [14] ordained _Peter Chrysologus_ in his room.
_Chrysologus_ in his Epistle to _Eutyches_, extant in the Acts of the
Council of _Chalcedon_, wrote thus: _Nos pro studio pacis & fidei, extra
consensum Romanæ civitatis Episcopi, causas fidei audire non possumus_.
Pope _Leo_ I. being consulted by _Leo_ Bishop of _Ravenna_ about some
questions, answered him by a decretal Epistle A.C. 451. And Pope _Gregory_
the great, [15] reprehending _John_ Bishop of _Ravenna_ about the use of
the _Pallium_, tells him of a Precept of one of his Predecessors, Pope
_John_, commanding that all the Privileges formerly granted to the Bishop
and Church of _Ravenna_ should be kept: to this _John_ returned a
submissive answer; and after his death Pope _Gregory_ ordered a visitation
of the Church of _Ravenna_, confirmed the privileges heretofore granted
them, and sent his _Pallium_, as of antient custom, to their new Bishop
_Marinian_. Yet this Church revolted sometimes from the Church of _Rome_,
but returned again to its obedience.

The rest of _Italy_, with the Islands adjacent, containing the
_suburbicarian_ regions, or ten Provinces under the temporal Vicar of
_Rome, viz._ 1_Campania_, 2_Tuscia_ and _Umbria_, 3_Picenum suburbicarium_,
4_Sicily_, 5_Apulia_ and _Calabria_, 6_Brutii_ and _Lucania_, 7_Samnium_,
8_Sardinia_, 9_Corsica_, and 10_Valeria_, constituted the proper Province
of the Bishop of _Rome_. For the Council of _Nice_ in their fifth Canon
ordained that Councils should be held every spring and autumn in every
Province; and according to this Canon, the Bishops of this Province met at
_Rome_ every half year. In this sense Pope _Leo_ I. applied this Canon to
_Rome_, in a decretal Epistle to the Bishops of _Sicily_, written _Alippio
& Ardabure Coss_. A.C. 447. _Quia saluberrime_, saith he, _à sanctis
patribus constitutum est, binos in annis singulis Episcoporum debere esse
conventus, terni semper ex vobis ad diem tertium Kalendarum Octobrium Romam
æterno concilio sociandi occurrant. Et indissimulanter à vobis hæc
consuetudo servetur, quoniam adjuvante Dei gratiâ, faciliùs poterit
provideri, ut in Ecclesiis Christi nulla scandala, nulli nascantur errores;
cum coram Apostolo Petro semper in communione tractatum fuerit, ut omnia
Canonum Decreta apud omnes Domini sacerdotes inviolata permaneant_. The
Province of _Rome_ therefore comprehended _Sicily_, with so much of _Italy_
and the neighbouring Islands as sent Bishops to the annual Councils of
_Rome_; but extended not into the Provinces of _Ravenna_, _Aquileia_,
_Millain_, _Arles_, &c. those Provinces having Councils of their own. The
Bishops in every Province of the _Roman_ Empire were convened in Council by
the Metropolitan or Bishop of the head city of the Province, and this
Bishop presided in that Council: but the Bishop of _Rome_ did not only
preside in his own Council of the Bishops of the _suburbicarian_ regions,
but also gave Orders to the Metropolitans of all the other Provinces in the
_Western Empire_, as their universal governor; as may be further perceived
by the following instances.

Pope _Zosimus_ A.C. 417, cited _Proculus_ Bishop of _Marseilles_ to appear
before a Council at _Rome_ for illegitimate Ordinations; and condemned him,
as he mentions in several of his Epistles. Pope _Boniface_ I. A.C. 419,
upon a complaint of the Clergy of _Valentia_ against _Maximus_ a Bishop,
summoned the Bishops of all _Gallia_ and the seven Provinces to convene in
a Council against him; and saith in his Epistle, that his Predecessors had
done the like. Pope _Leo_ I. called a general Council of all the Provinces
of _Spain_ to meet in _Gallæcia_ against the _Manichees_ and
_Priscillianists_, as he says in his decretal Epistle to _Turribius_ a
_Spanish_ Bishop. And in one of his decretal Epistles to _Nicetas_ Bishop
of _Aquileia_, he commands him to call a Council of the Bishops of that
Province against the _Pelagians_, which might ratify all the Synodal
Decrees which had been already ratified by the See of _Rome_ against this
heresy. And in his decretal Epistle to _Anastasius_ Bishop of
_Thessalonica_, he ordained that Bishop should hold two Provincial Councils
every year, and refer the harder causes to the See of _Rome_: and if upon
any extraordinary occasion it should be necessary to call a Council, he
should not be troublesom to the Bishops under him, but content himself with
two Bishops out of every Province, and not detain them above fifteen days.
In the same Epistle he describes the form of Church-Government then set up,
to consist in a subordination of all the Churches to the See of _Rome_: _De
qua forma_, saith he, _Episcoporum quoque est orta distinctio, & magna
dispositione provisum est ne omnes sibi omnia vindicarent, sed essent in
singulis Provinciis singuli quorum inter fratres haberetur prima sententia,
& rursus quidam in majoribus urbibus constituti sollicitudinem sumerent
ampliorem, per quos ad unam Petri Sedem universalis Ecclesiæ cura
conflueret, & nihil usque à suo capite dissideret. Qui ergo scit se
quibusdam esse præpositum, non moleste ferat aliquem sibi esse præpositum;
sed obedientiam quam exigit etiam ipse dependat; et sicut non vult gravis
oneris sarcinam ferre, ita non audeat aliis importabile pondus imponere_.
These words sufficiently shew the monarchical form of government then set
up in the Churches of the _Western Empire_ under the Bishop of _Rome_, by
means of the imperial Decree of _Gratian_, and the appeals and decretal
Epistles grounded thereupon.

The same Pope _Leo_, having in a Council at _Rome_ passed sentence upon
_Hilary_ Bishop of _Arles_, for what he had done by a Provincial Council in
_Gallia_, took occasion from thence to procure the following Edict from the
_Western_ Emperor _Valentinian_ III. for the more absolute establishing the
authority of his See over all the Churches of the _Western Empire_.

_Impp. Theodosius & Valentinianus AA. Aetio
Viro illustri, Comiti & Magistro utriusque
militiæ & Patricio._

_Certum est & nobis & imperio nostro unicum esse præsidium in supernæ
Divinitatis favore, ad quem promerendum præcipue Christiana fides &
veneranda nobis religio suffragatur. Cum igitur Sedis Apostolicæ Primatum
sancti Petri meritum, qui princeps est Episcopalis coronæ & Romanæ dignitas
civitatis, sacræ etiam Synodi firmavit auctoritas: ne quid præter
auctoritatem Sedis istius illicitum præsumptio attemperare nitatur: tunc
enim demum Ecclesiarum pax ubique servabitur, si Rectorem suum agnoscat
Universitas. Hæc cum hactenus inviolabiliter suerint custodita, Hilarius
Arelatensis, sicut venerabilis viri Leonis Romani Papæ fideli relatione
comperimus, contumaci ausu illicita quædam præsumenda tentavit, & ideo
Transalpinas Ecclesias abominabilis tumultus invasit, quod recens maximè
testatur exemplum. Hilarius enim qui Episcopus Arelatensis vocatur,
Ecclesiæ Romanæ urbis inconsulto Pontifice indebitas sibi ordinationes
Episcoporum solâ temeritate usurpans invasit. Nam alios incompetenter
removit; indecenter alios, invitis & repugnantibus civibus, ordinavit. Qui
quidem, quoniam non facile ab his qui non elegerant, recipiebantur, manum
sibi contrahebat armatam, & claustra murorum in hostilem morem vel
obsidione cingebat, vel aggressione reserabat, & ad sedem quietis pacem
prædicaturus per bella ducebat: His talibus contra Imperii majestatem, &
contra reverentiam Apostolicæ Sedis admissis, per ordinem religiosi viri
Urbis Papæ cognitione discussis, certa in eum, ex his quos malè
ordinaverat, lata sententia est. Erat quidem ipsa sententia per Gallias
etiam sine Imperiali Sanctione valitura: quid enim Pontificis auctoritate
non liceret? Sed nostram quoque præceptionem hæc ratio provocavit. Nec
ulterius vel Hilario, quem adhuc Episcopum nuncupare sola mansueta Præsulis
permittit humanitas, nec cuiquam alteri ecclesiasticis rebus arma miscere,
aut præceptis Romani Antistitis liceat obviare: ausibus enim talibus fides
& reverentia nostri violatur Imperii. Nec hoc solum, quod est maximi
criminis, submovemus: verum ne levis saltem inter Ecclesias turba nascatur,
vel in aliquo minui religionis disciplina videatur, hoc perenni sanctione
discernimus; nequid tam Episcopis Gallicanis quam aliarum Provinciarum
contra consuetudinem veterem liceat, sine viri venerabilis Papæ Urbis
æternæ auctoritate, tentare. Sed illis omnibusque pro lege sit, quicquid
sanxit vel sanxerit Apostolicæ Sedis auctoritas: ita ut quisquis
Episcoporum ad judicium Romani Antistitis evocatus venire neglexerit, per
Moderatorem ejusdem Provinciæ adesse cogatur, per omnia servatis quæ Divi
parentes nostri Romanæ Ecclesiæ detulerunt, Aetî pater carissime Augusti.
Unde illustris & præclara magnificentia tua præsentis Edictalis Legis
auctoritate faciet quæ sunt superius statuta servari, decem librarum auri
multa protinus exigenda ab unoquoque Judice qui passus fuerit præcepta
nostra violari. Divinitas te servet per multos annos, parens carissime.
Dat. _viii._ Id. Jun. Romæ, Valentiniano A. _vi._ Consule_, A.C. 445. By
this Edict the Emperor _Valentinian_ enjoined an absolute obedience to the
will of the Bishop of _Rome_ thro'out all the Churches of his Empire; and
declares, that for the Bishops to attempt any thing without the Pope's
authority is contrary to antient custom, and that the Bishops summoned to
appear before his judicature must be carried thither by the Governor of the
Province; and he ascribes these privileges of the See of _Rome_ to the
concessions of his dead Ancestors, that is, to the Edict of _Gratian_ and
_Valentinian_ II. as above: by which reckoning this dominion of the Church
of _Rome_ was now of 66 years standing: and if in all this time it had not
been sufficiently established, this new Edict was enough to settle it
beyond all question thro'out the _Western Empire_.

Hence all the Bishops of the Province of _Arles_ in their Letter to Pope
_Leo_, A.C. 450, petitioning for a restitution of the privileges of their
Metropolitan, say: _Per beatum Petrum Apostolorum principem, sacrosancta
Ecclesia Romana tenebat supra omnes totius mundi Ecclesias principatum_.
And _Ceratius_, _Salonius_ and _Veranus_, three Bishops of _Gallia_, say,
in their Epistle to the same Pope: _Magna præterea & ineffabili quadam nos
peculiares tui gratulatione succrescimus, quod illa specialis doctrinæ
vestræ pagina ita per omnium Ecclesiarum conventicula celebratur, ut vere
consona omnium sententia declaretur; merito illic principatum Sedis
Apostolicæ constitutum, unde adhuc Apostolici spiritus oracula reserentur_.
And _Leo_ himself, in [16] his Epistle to the metropolitan Bishops thro'out
_Illyricum_: _Quia per omnes Ecclesias cura nostra distenditur, exigente
hoc à nobis Domino, qui Apostolicæ dignitatis beatissimo Apostolo Petro
primatum, fidei sui remuneratione commisit, universalem Ecclesiam in
fundamenti ipsius soliditate constituens_.

While this Ecclesiastical Dominion was rising up, the northern barbarous
nations invaded the _Western Empire_, and founded several kingdoms therein,
of different religions from the Church of _Rome_. But these kingdoms by
degrees embraced the _Roman_ faith, and at the same time submitted to the
Pope's authority. The _Franks_ in _Gaul_ submitted in the end of the fifth
Century, the _Goths_ in _Spain_ in the end of the sixth; and the _Lombards_
in _Italy_ were conquered by _Charles_ the great A.C. 774. Between the
years 775 and 794, the same _Charles_ extended the Pope's authority over
all _Germany_ and _Hungary_ as far as the river _Theysse_ and the _Baltic_
sea; he then set him above all human judicature, and at the same time
assisted him in subduing the City and Duchy of _Rome_. By the conversion of
the ten kingdoms to the _Roman_ religion, the Pope only enlarged his
spiritual dominion, but did not yet rise up as a horn of the Beast. It was
his temporal dominion which made him one of the horns: and this dominion he
acquired in the latter half of the eighth century, by subduing three of the
former horns as above. And now being arrived at a temporal dominion, and a
power above all human judicature, he reigned [17] _with a look more stout
than his fellows_, and [18] _times and laws were_ henceforward _given into
his hands, for a time times and half a time_, or three times and an half;
that is, for 1260 solar years, reckoning a time for a Calendar year of 360
days, and a day for a solar year. After which [19] _the judgment is to sit,
and they shall take away his dominion_, not at once, but by degrees, _to
consume, and to destroy it unto the end. [20] And the kingdom and dominion,
and greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven shall_, by degrees, _be
given unto the people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him_.

Notes to Chap. VIII.

[1] _See the Annals of _Baronius__, Anno 381. Sect. 6.

[2] Populos Galliciæ.

[3] Hormisd. Epist. 24. 26.

[4] _The words, _sine auctoritate_, seem wanting._

[5] Vide Caroli a S. Paulo Geographiam sacram, p. 72, 73.

[6] Greg. M. lib. 1. Indic. 9. Epist. 16.

[7] Apud Gratianum de Mediolanensi & Aquileiensi Episcopis.

[8] Greg. M. lib. 3. Epist. 26. & lib. 4. Epist. 1.

[9] Greg. lib. 5. Epist. 4.

[10] Greg. lib. 9. Epist. 10 & 67.

[11] Greg. lib. 11. Epist. 3, 4.

[12] Ambros l. 3. de sacramentis, c. 1.

[13] Sigonius de Regno Italiæ, lib. 5.

[14] _See _Baronius__, Anno 433. Sect. 24.

[15] Greg. M. lib. 3. Epist. 56, 57. & lib. 5. Epist. 25, 26, 56.

[16] Epist. 25. apud Holstenium.

[17] Dan. vii. 20.

[18] Ver. 25.

[19] Ver. 26.

[20] Ver. 27.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. IX.

_Of the kingdoms represented in _Daniel_ by the Ram and He-Goat_.

The second and third Empires, represented by the Bear and Leopard, are
again represented by the Ram and He-Goat; but with this difference, that
the Ram represents the kingdoms of the _Medes_ and _Persians_ from the
beginning of the four Empires, and the Goat represents the kingdom of the
_Greeks_ to the end of them. By this means, under the type of the Ram and
He-Goat, the times of all the four Empires are again described: _I lifted
up mine eyes_, saith [1] _Daniel_, _and saw_, _and behold there stood
before the river_ [Ulai] _a Ram which had two horns, and the two horns were
high, but one was higher than the other, and the higher came up last.--And
the Ram having two horns, are the kings of _Media_ and _Persia__: not two
persons but two kingdoms, the kingdoms of _Media_ and _Persia_; and the
kingdom of _Persia_ was the higher horn and came up last. The kingdom of
_Persia_ rose up, when _Cyrus_ having newly conquered _Babylon_, revolted
from _Darius_ King of the _Medes_, and beat him at _Pasargadæ_, and set up
the _Persians_ above the _Medes_. This was the horn which came up last. And
the horn which came up first was the kingdom of the _Medes_, from the time
that _Cyaxares_ and _Nebuchadnezzar_ overthrew _Nineveh_, and shared the
Empire of the _Assyrians_ between them. The Empires of _Media_ and
_Babylon_ were contemporary, and rose up together by the fall of the
_Assyrian_ Empire; and the Prophecy of the four Beasts begins with one of
them, and that of the Ram and He-Goat with the other. As the Ram represents
the kingdom of _Media_ and _Persia_ from the beginning of the four Empires;
so the He-Goat represents the Empire of the _Greeks_ to the end of those
Monarchies. In the reign of his great horn, and of the four horns which
succeeded it, he represents this Empire during the reign of the Leopard:
and in the reign of his little horn, which stood up in the latter time of
the kingdom of the four, and after their fall became mighty but not by his
own power, he represents it during the reign of the fourth Beast.

_The rough Goat_, saith _Daniel, is the King of_ Grecia, that is, the
kingdom; _and the great horn between his eyes is the first King_: not the
first Monarch, but the first kingdom, that which lasted during the reign of
_Alexander_ the great, and his brother _Aridæus_ and two young sons,
_Alexander_ and _Hercules_. [2] _Now that_ [horn] _being broken off,
whereas four_ [horns] _stood up for it, four kingdoms shall stand up out of
the nation_ [of the _Greeks_], _but not in his_ [the first horn's] _power_.
The four horns are therefore four kingdoms; and by consequence, the first
great horn which they succeeded is the first great kingdom of the _Greeks_,
that which was founded by _Alexander_ the great, _An. Nabonass._ 414, and
lasted till the death of his son _Hercules_, _An. Nabonass._ 441. And the
four are those of _Cassander_, _Lysimachus_, _Antigonus_, and _Ptolemy_, as
above.

[3] _And in the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors are
come to the full, a King_ [or new kingdom] _of fierce countenance, and
understanding dark sentences, shall stand up: and his power shall be
mighty, but not by his own power_. This King was the last horn of the Goat,
the little horn which came up out of one of the four horns, and waxed
exceeding great. The latter time of their kingdom was when the _Romans_
began to conquer them, that is, when they conquered _Perseus_ King of
_Macedonia_, the fundamental kingdom of the _Greeks_. And at that time the
transgressors came to the full: for then the High-priesthood was exposed to
sale, the Vessels of the Temple were sold to pay for the purchase; and the
High-priest, with some of the _Jews_, procured a licence from _Antiochus
Epiphanes_ to do after the ordinances of the heathen, and set up a school
at _Jerusalem_ for teaching those ordinances. Then _Antiochus_ took
_Jerusalem_ with an armed force, slew 4000 _Jews_, took as many prisoners
and sold them, spoiled the Temple, interdicted the worship, commanded the
Law of _Moses_ to be burnt, and set up the worship of the heathen Gods in
all _Judea_. In the very same year, _An. Nabonass._ 580, the _Romans_
conquered _Macedonia_, the chief of the four horns. Hitherto the Goat was
mighty by its own power, but henceforward began to be under the _Romans_.
_Daniel_ distinguishes the times, by describing very particularly the
actions of the Kings of the north and south, those two of the four horns
which bordered upon _Judea_, until the _Romans_ conquered _Macedonia_; and
thenceforward only touching upon the main revolutions which happened within
the compass of the nations represented by the Goat. In this latter period
of time the little horn was to stand up and grow mighty, but not by his own
power.

The three first of _Daniel_'s Beasts had their dominions taken away, each
of them at the rise of the next Beast; but their lives were prolonged, and
they are all of them still alive. The third Beast, or Leopard, reigned in
his four heads, till the rise of the fourth Beast, or Empire of the
_Latins_; and his life was prolonged under their power. This Leopard
reigning in his four heads, signifies the same thing with the He-Goat
reigning in his four horns: and therefore the He-Goat reigned in his four
horns till the rise of _Daniel_'s fourth Beast, or Empire of the _Latins_:
then its dominion was taken away by the _Latins_, but its life was
prolonged under their power. The _Latins_ are not comprehended among the
nations represented by the He-Goat in this Prophecy: their power over the
_Greeks_ is only named in it, to distinguish the times in which the He-Goat
was mighty by his own power, from the times in which he was mighty but not
by his own power. He was mighty by his own power till his dominion was
taken away by the _Latins_; after that, his life was prolonged under their
dominion, and this prolonging of his life was in the days of his last horn:
for in the days of this horn the Goat became mighty, but not by his own
power.

Now because this horn was a horn of the Goat, we are to look for it among
the nations which composed the body of the Goat. Among those nations he was
to rise up and grow mighty: he grew mighty [4] _towards the south, and
towards the east, and towards the pleasant land_; and therefore he was to
rise up in the north-west parts of those nations, and extend his dominion
towards _Egypt_, _Syria_ and _Judea_. In the latter time of the kingdom of
the four horns, it was to rise up out of one of them and subdue the rest,
but not by its own power. It was to be assisted by a foreign power, a power
superior to itself, the power which took away the dominion of the third
Beast, the power of the fourth Beast. And such a little horn was the
kingdom of _Macedonia_, from the time that it became subject to the
_Romans_. This kingdom, by the victory of the _Romans_ over _Persius_ King
of _Macedonia_, _Anno Nabonass._ 580, ceased to be one of the four horns of
the Goat, and became a dominion of a new sort: not a horn of the fourth
Beast, for _Macedonia_ belonged to the body of the third; but a horn of the
third Beast of a new sort, a horn of the Goat which grew mighty but not by
his own power, a horn which rose up and grew potent under a foreign power,
the power of the _Romans_.

The _Romans_, by the legacy of _Attalus_ the last King of _Pergamus_, _An.
Nabonass._ 615, inherited that kingdom, including all _Asia Minor_ on this
side mount _Taurus_. _An. Nabonass._ 684 and 685 they conquered _Armenia_,
_Syria_ and _Judea_; _An. Nabonass._ 718, they subdued _Egypt_. And by
these conquests the little horn [5] _waxed exceeding great towards the
south, and towards the east, and towards the pleasant land. And it waxed
great even to the host of heaven; and cast down some of the host and of the
stars to the ground, and stamped upon them_, that is, upon the people and
great men of the _Jews_. [6] _Yea, he magnified himself even to the Prince
of the Host_, the _Messiah_, the Prince of the _Jews_, whom he put to
death, _An. Nabonass._ 780. _And by him the daily sacrifice was taken away,
and the place of his sanctuary was cast down_, viz. in the wars which the
armies of the _Eastern_ nations under the conduct of the _Romans_ made
against _Judea_, when _Nero_ and _Vespasian_ were Emperors, _An. Nabonass._
816, 817, 818. [7] _And an host was given him against the daily sacrifice
by reason of transgression, and it cast down the truth to the ground, and
it practised and prospered_. This transgression is in the next words called
_the transgression of desolation_; and in _Dan._ xi. 31. _the abomination
which maketh desolate_; and in _Matth._ xxiv. 15. _the abomination of
desolation, spoken of by _Daniel_ the prophet, standing in the holy place_.
It may relate chiefly to the worship of _Jupiter Olympius_ in his Temple
built by the Emperor _Hadrian_, in the place of the Temple of the _Jews_,
and to the revolt of the _Jews_ under _Barchochab_ occasioned thereby, and
to the desolation of _Judea_ which followed thereupon; all the _Jews_,
being thenceforward banished _Judea_ upon pain of death. _Then I heard_,
saith [8] _Daniel, one saint speaking, and another saint said unto that
certain saint which spake, How long shall be the vision concerning the
daily sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation, to give both the
sanctuary and the host to be trodden under foot? And he said unto me, Unto
two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed._
_Daniel_'s days are years; and these years may perhaps be reckoned either
from the destruction of the Temple by the _Romans_ in the reign of
_Vespasian_, or from the pollution of the Sanctuary by the worship of
_Jupiter Olympius_, or from the desolation of _Judea_ made in the end of
the _Jewish_ war by the banishment of all the _Jews_ out of their own
country, or from some other period which time will discover. Henceforward
the last horn of the Goat continued mighty under the _Romans_, till the
reign of _Constantine_ the great and his sons: and then by the division of
the _Roman_ Empire between the _Greek_ and _Latin_ Emperors, it separated
from the _Latins_, and became the _Greek_ Empire alone, but yet under the
dominion of a _Roman_ family; and at present it is mighty under the
dominion of the _Turks_.

This last horn is by some taken for _Antiochus Epiphanes_, but not very
judiciously. A horn of a Beast is never taken for a single person: it
always signifies a new kingdom, and the kingdom of _Antiochus_ was an old
one. _Antiochus_ reigned over one of the four horns, and the little horn
was a fifth under its proper kings. This horn was at first a little one,
and waxed exceeding great, but so did not _Antiochus_. It is described
great above all the former horns, and so was not _Antiochus_. His kingdom
on the contrary was weak, and tributary to the _Romans_, and he did not
enlarge it. The horn was a _King of fierce countenance, and destroyed
wonderfully, and prospered and practised_; that is, he prospered in his
practises against the holy people: but _Antiochus_ was frighted out of
_Egypt_ by a mere message of the _Romans_, and afterwards routed and
baffled by the _Jews_. The horn was mighty by another's power, _Antiochus_
acted by his own. The horn stood up against the Prince of the Host of
heaven, the Prince of Princes; and this is the character not of _Antiochus_
but of _Antichrist_. The horn cast down the Sanctuary to the ground, and so
did not _Antiochus_; he left it standing. The Sanctuary and Host were
trampled under foot 2300 days; and in _Daniel_'s Prophecies days are put
for years: but the profanation of the Temple in the reign of _Antiochus_
did not last so many natural days. These were to last till the time of the
end, till the last end of the indignation against the _Jews_; and this
indignation is not yet at an end. They were to last till the Sanctuary
which had been cast down should be cleansed, and the Sanctuary is not yet
cleansed.

This Prophecy of the Ram and He-Goat is repeated in the last Prophecy of
_Daniel_. There the Angel tells _Daniel_, that [9] _he stood up to
strengthen _Darius_ the _Mede_, and that there should stand up yet three
kings in _Persia__, [_Cyrus_, _Cambyses_, and _Darius Hystaspis_] _and the
fourth_ [_Xerxes_] _should be far richer than they all; and by his wealth
thro' his riches he should stir up all against the realm of _Grecia__. This
relates to the Ram, whose two horns were the kingdoms of _Media_ and
_Persia_. Then he goes on to describe the horns of the Goat by the [10]
_standing up of a mighty king, which should rule with great dominion, and
do according to his will_; and by the breaking of his kingdom into four
smaller kingdoms, and not descending to his own posterity. Then he
describes the actions of two of those kingdoms which bordered on _Judea_,
_viz_. _Egypt_ and _Syria_, calling them the Kings of the _South_ and
_North_, that is, in respect of _Judea_; and he carries on the description
till the latter end of the kingdoms of the four, and till the reign of
_Antiochus Epiphanes_, when transgressors were come to the full. In the
eighth year of _Antiochus_, the year in which he profaned the Temple and
set up the heathen Gods in all _Judea_, and the _Romans_ conquered the
kingdom of _Macedon_; the prophetic Angel leaves off describing the affairs
of the kings of the _South_ and _North_, and begins to describe those of
the _Greeks_ under the dominion of the _Romans_, in these words: [11] _And
after him Arms_ [the _Romans_] _shall stand up, and they shall pollute the
sanctuary of strength_. As [Hebrew: MMLK] signifies _after the king_, Dan.
xi. 8; so here [Hebrew: MMNW] may signify _after him_: and so [Hebrew:
MN-H'CHT] may signify _after one of them_, Dan. viii. 9. Arms are every
where in these Prophecies of _Daniel_ put for the military power of a
kingdom, and they stand up when they conquer and grow powerful. The
_Romans_ conquered _Illyricum_, _Epirus_ and _Macedonia_, in the year of
_Nabonassar_ 580; and thirty five years after, by the last will and
testament of _Attalus_ the last King of _Pergamus_, they inherited that
rich and flourishing kingdom, that is, all _Asia_ on this side mount
_Taurus_: and sixty nine years after, they conquered the kingdom of
_Syria_, and reduced it into a Province: and thirty four years after they
did the like to _Egypt_. By all these steps the _Roman_ arms stood up over
the _Greeks_. And after 95 years more, by making war upon the _Jews, they
polluted the sanctuary of strength, and took away the daily sacrifice,
and_, in its room soon after, _placed the abomination which made_ the Land
_desolate_: for this abomination was placed after the days of Christ,
_Matth._ xxiv. 15. In the 16th year of the Emperor _Hadrian_, A. C. 132,
they placed this abomination by building a Temple to _Jupiter Capitolinus_,
where the Temple of God in _Jerusalem_ had stood. Thereupon the _Jews_
under the conduct of _Barchochab_ rose up in arms against the _Romans_, and
in that war had 50 cities demolished, 985 of their best towns destroyed,
and 580000 men slain by the sword: and in the end of the war, A.C. 136,
they were all banished _Judea_ upon pain or death; and that time the land
hath remained desolate of its old inhabitants.

Now that the prophetic Angel passes in this manner from the four kingdoms
of the _Greeks_ to the _Romans_ reigning over the _Greeks_, is confirmed
from hence, that in the next place he describes the affairs of the
_Christians_ unto the time of the end, in these words: [12] _And they that
understand among the people shall instruct many, yet they shall fall by the
sword and by flame, by captivity and by spoil many days. Now when they
shall fall they shall be holpen with a little help_, _viz_. in the reign of
_Constantine_ the great; _but many shall cleave to them with dissimulation.
And some of them of understanding there shall fall to try them, and to
purge_ them from the dissemblers; _and to make them white even to the time
of the end_. And a little after, the time of the end is said to be _a time,
times, and half a time_: which is the duration of the reign of the last
horn of _Daniel_'s fourth Beast, and of the _Woman_ and her _Beast_ in the
_Apocalyps_.

Notes to Chap. IX.

[1] Chap. viii. 3.

[2] Ver. 22.

[3] Ver. 23.

[4] Chap. viii. 9.

[5] Chap. viii. 9, 10.

[6] Ver. 11.

[7] Ver. 12.

[8] Ver. 13, 14.

[9] Dan. xi. 1, 2.

[10] Ver. 3.

[11] Dan xi. 31.

[12] Chap. xi. 33, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. X.

_Of the Prophecy of the Seventy Weeks._

The Vision of the Image composed of four Metals was given first to
_Nebuchadnezzar_, and then to _Daniel_ in a dream: and _Daniel_ began then
to be celebrated for revealing of secrets, _Ezek._ xxviii. 3. The Vision of
the four Beasts, and of _the Son of man_ coming in the clouds of heaven,
was also given to _Daniel_ in a dream. That of the Ram and the He-Goat
appeared to him in the day time, when he was by the bank of the river
_Ulay_; and was explained to him by the prophetic Angel _Gabriel_. It
concerns the _Prince of the host_, and the _Prince of Princes_: and now in
the first year of _Darius_ the _Mede_ over _Babylon_, the same prophetic
Angel appears to _Daniel_ again, and explains to him what is meant by the
_Son of man_, by the _Prince of the host_, and the _Prince of Princes_. The
Prophecy of the _Son of man_ coming in the clouds of heaven relates to the
second coming of _Christ_; that of the _Prince of the host_ relates to his
first coming: and this Prophecy of the _Messiah_, in explaining them,
relates to both comings, and assigns the times thereof.

This Prophecy, like all the rest of _Daniel_'s, consists of two parts, an
introductory Prophecy and an explanation thereof; the whole I thus
translate and interpret.

[1] '_Seventy weeks are [2] cut out upon thy people, and upon thy holy
city, to finish transgression, and [3] to make an end of sins, to expiate
iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, to consummate the
Vision and [4] the Prophet, and to anoint the most Holy_.

'_Know also and understand, that from the going forth of the commandment to
cause to return and to build _Jerusalem_, unto [5] the Anointed the Prince,
shall be seven weeks_.

'_Yet threescore and two weeks shall [6] it return, and the street be built
and the wall; but in troublesome times: and after the threescore and two
weeks, the Anointed shall be cut off, and [6] it shall not be his; but the
people of a Prince to come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary: and
the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the war,
desolations are determined_.

'_Yet shall he confirm the covenant with many for one week: and in half a
week he shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease: and upon a wing of
abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation, and
that which is determined be poured upon the desolate_.'

_Seventy weeks are cut out upon thy people, and upon thy holy city, to
finish transgression_, &c. Here, by putting a week for seven years, are
reckoned 490 years from the time that the dispersed _Jews_ should be
re-incorporated into [7] a people and a holy city, until the death and
resurrection of _Christ_; whereby _transgression should be finished, and
sins ended, iniquity be expiated, and everlasting righteousness brought in,
and this Vision be accomplished, and the Prophet consummated_, that Prophet
whom the _Jews_ expected; and whereby _the most Holy_ should be _anointed_,
he who is therefore in the next words called the _Anointed_, that is, the
_Messiah_, or the _Christ_. For by joining the accomplishment of the vision
with the expiation of sins, the 490 years are ended with the death of
_Christ_. Now the dispersed _Jews_ became a people and city when they first
returned into a polity or body politick; and this was in the seventh year
of _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, when _Ezra_ returned with a body of _Jews_ from
captivity, and revived the _Jewish_ worship; and by the King's commission
created Magistrates in all the land, to judge and govern the people
according to the laws of God and the King, _Ezra_ vii. 25. There were but
two returns from captivity, _Zerubbabel_'s and _Ezra_'s; in _Zerubbabel_'s
they had only commission to build the Temple, in _Ezra_'s they first became
a polity or city by a government of their own. Now the years of this
_Artaxerxes_ began about two or three months after the summer solstice, and
his seventh year fell in with the third year of the eightieth _Olympiad_;
and the latter part thereof, wherein _Ezra_ went up to _Jerusalem_, was in
the year of the _Julian Period_ 4257. Count the time from thence to the
death of _Christ_, and you will find it just 490 years. If you count in
_Judaic_ years commencing in autumn, and date the reckoning from the first
autumn after _Ezra_'s coming to _Jerusalem_, when he put the King's decree
in execution; the death of _Christ_ will fall on the year of the _Julian
Period_ 4747, _Anno Domini_ 34; and the weeks will be _Judaic_ weeks,
ending with sabbatical years; and this I take to be the truth: but if you
had rather place the death of _Christ_ in the year before, as is commonly
done, you may take the year of _Ezra_'s journey into the reckoning.

_Know also and understand, that from the going forth of the commandment to
cause to return and to build _Jerusalem_, unto the Anointed the Prince,
shall be seven weeks_. The former part of the Prophecy related to the first
coming of _Christ_, being dated to his coming as a Prophet; this being
dated to his coming to be Prince or King, seems to relate to his second
coming. There, the Prophet was consummate, and the most holy anointed:
here, he that was anointed comes to be Prince and to reign. For _Daniel_'s
Prophecies reach to the end of the world; and there is scarce a Prophecy in
the Old Testament concerning _Christ_, which doth not in something or other
relate to his second coming. If divers of the antients, as [8] _Irenæus_,
[9] _Julius Africanus_, _Hippolytus_ the martyr, and _Apollinaris_ Bishop
of _Laodicea_, applied the half week to the times of _Antichrist_; why may
not we, by the same liberty of interpretation, apply the seven weeks to the
time when _Antichrist_ shall be destroyed by the brightness of _Christ_'s
coming?

The _Israelites_ in the days of the antient Prophets, when the ten Tribes
were led into captivity, expected a double return; and that at the first
the _Jews_ should build a new Temple inferior to _Solomon_'s, until the
time of that age should be fulfilled; and afterwards they should return
from all places of their captivity, and build _Jerusalem_ and the Temple
gloriously, _Tobit_ xiv. 4, 5, 6: and to express the glory and excellence
of this city, it is figuratively said to be built of precious stones,
_Tobit_ xiii. 16, 17, 18. _Isa._ liv. 11, 12. _Rev._ xi. and called the
_New Jerusalem_, the _Heavenly Jerusalem_, the _Holy City_, the _Lamb's
Wife_, the _City of the Great King_, the _City into which the Kings of the
earth do bring their glory and honour_. _Now_ while such a return from
captivity was the expectation of _Israel_, even before the times of
_Daniel_, I know not why _Daniel_ should omit it in his Prophecy. This part
of the Prophecy being therefore not yet fulfilled, I shall not attempt a
particular interpretation of it, but content myself with observing, that as
the _seventy_ and the _sixty two weeks_ were _Jewish_ weeks, ending with
sabbatical years; so the _seven weeks_ are the compass of a _Jubilee_, and
begin and end with actions proper for a _Jubilee_, and of the highest
nature for which a _Jubilee_ can be kept: and that since _the commandment
to return and to build _Jerusalem__, precedes the _Messiah the Prince_ 49
years; it may perhaps come forth not from the _Jews_ themselves, but from
some other kingdom friendly to them, and precede their return from
captivity, and give occasion to it; and lastly, that this rebuilding of
_Jerusalem_ and the waste places of _Judah_ is predicted in _Micah_ vii.
11. _Amos_ ix. 11, 14. _Ezek._ xxxvi. 33, 35, 36, 38. _Isa._ liv. 3, 11,
12. lv. 12. lxi. 4. lxv. 18, 21,22. and _Tobit_ xiv. 5. and that the return
from captivity and coming of the _Messiah_ and his kingdom are described in
_Daniel_ vii. _Rev._ xix. _Acts_ i. _Mat._ xxiv. _Joel_ iii. _Ezek._ xxxvi.
xxxvii. _Isa._ lx. lxii. lxiii. lxv. and lxvi. and many other places of
scripture. The manner I know not. Let time be the Interpreter.

_Yet threescore and two weeks shall it return, and the street be built and
the wall, but in troublesome times: and after the threescore and two weeks
the _Messiah_ shall be cut off, and it shall not be his; but the people of
a Prince to come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary_, &c. Having
foretold both comings of _Christ_, and dated the last from their returning
and building _Jerusalem_; to prevent the applying that to the building
_Jerusalem_ by _Nehemiah_, he distinguishes this from that, by saying that
from this period to the _Anointed_ shall be, not seven weeks, but
threescore and two weeks, and this not in prosperous but in troublesome
times; and at the end of these Weeks the _Messiah_ shall not be the Prince
of the _Jews_, but be cut off; and _Jerusalem_ not be his, but the city and
sanctuary be destroyed. Now _Nehemiah_ came to _Jerusalem_ in the 20th year
of this same _Artaxerxes_, while _Ezra_ still continued there, _Nehem._
xii. 36, and found the city lying waste, and the houses and wall unbuilt,
_Nehem._ ii. 17. vii. 4, and finished the wall the 25th day of the month
_Elul_, _Nehem._ vi. 15, in the 28th year of the King, that is, in
_September_ in the year of the _Julian Period_ 4278. Count now from this
year threescore and two weeks of years, that is 434 years, and the
reckoning will end in _September_ in the year of the _Julian Period_ 4712
which is the year in which _Christ_ was born, according to _Clemens
Alexandrinus_, _Irenæus_, _Eusebius_, _Epiphanius_, _Jerome_, _Orosius_,
_Cassiodorus_, and other antients; and this was the general opinion, till
_Dionysius Exiguus_ invented the vulgar account, in which _Christ_'s birth
is placed two years later. If with some you reckon that _Christ_ was born
three or four years before the vulgar account, yet his birth will fall in
the latter part of the last week, which is enough. How after these weeks
_Christ_ was cut off and the city and sanctuary destroyed by the _Romans_,
is well known.

_Yet shall he confirm the covenant with many for one week._ He kept it,
notwithstanding his death, till the rejection of the _Jews_, and calling of
_Cornelius_ and the _Gentiles_ in the seventh year after his passion.

_And in half a week he shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease_;
that is, by the war of the _Romans_ upon the _Jews_: which war, after some
commotions, began in the 13th year of _Nero_, A.D. 67, in the spring, when
_Vespasian_ with an army invaded them; and ended in the second year of
_Vespasian_, A.D. 70, in autumn, _Sept._ 7, when _Titus_ took the city,
having burnt the Temple 27 days before: so that it lasted three years and
an half.

_And upon a wing of abominations he shall cause desolation, even until the
consummation, and that which is determined be poured upon the desolate._
The Prophets, in representing kingdoms by Beasts and Birds, put their wings
stretcht out over any country for their armies sent out to invade and rule
over that country. Hence a wing of abominations is an army of false Gods:
for an abomination is often put in scripture for a false God; as where
_Chemosh_ is called [10] the abomination of _Moab_, and _Molech_ the
abomination of _Ammon_. The meaning therefore is, that the people of a
Prince to come shall destroy the sanctuary, and abolish the daily worship
of the true God, and overspread the land with an army of false gods; and by
setting up their dominion and worship, cause desolation to the _Jews_,
until the times of the _Gentiles_ be fulfilled. For _Christ_ tells us, that
the abomination of desolation spoken of by _Daniel_ was to be set up in the
times of the _Roman Empire_, _Matth._ xxiv. 15.

Thus have we in this short Prophecy, a prediction of all the main periods
relating to the coming of the _Messiah_; the time of his birth, that of his
death, that of the rejection of the _Jews_, the duration of the _Jewish_
war whereby he caused the city and sanctuary to be destroyed, and the time
of his second coming: and so the interpretation here given is more full and
complete and adequate to the design, than if we should restrain it to his
first coming only, as Interpreters usually do. We avoid also the doing
violence to the language of _Daniel_, by taking the _seven weeks_ and
_sixty two weeks_ for one number. Had that been _Daniel_'s meaning, he
would have said _sixty and nine weeks_, and not _seven weeks_ and _sixty
two weeks_, a way of numbring used by no nation. In our way the years are
_Jewish Luni-solar years_, [11] as they ought to be; and the _seventy weeks
of years_ are _Jewish weeks_ ending with _sabbatical years_, which is very
remarkable. For they end either with the year of the birth of _Christ_, two
years before the vulgar account, or with the year of his death, or with the
seventh year after it: all which are _sabbatical years_. Others either
count by Lunar years, or by weeks not _Judaic_: and, which is worst, they
ground their interpretations on erroneous Chronology, excepting the opinion
of _Funccius_ about the _seventy weeks_, which is the same with ours. For
they place _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_ in the reign of _Artaxerxes Mnemon_, and
the building of the Temple in the reign of _Darius Nothus_, and date the
weeks of _Daniel_ from those two reigns.

The grounds of the Chronology here followed, I will now set down as briefly
as I can.

The _Peloponnesian_ war began in spring _An._ 1 _Olymp._ 87, as _Diodorus_,
_Eusebius_, and all other authors agree. It began two months before
_Pythodorus_ ceased to be _Archon_, _Thucyd._ l. 2. that is, in _April_,
two months before the end of the _Olympic_ year. Now the years of this war
are most certainly determined by the 50 years distance of its first year
from the transit of _Xerxes_ inclusively, _Thucyd._ l. 2. or 48 years
exclusively, _Eratosth. apud Clem. Alex._ by the 69 years distance of its
end, or 27th year, from the beginning of _Alexander_'s reign in _Greece_;
by the acting of the _Olympic_ games in its 4th and 12th years, _Thucyd._
l. 5; and by three eclipses of the sun, and one of the moon, mentioned by
_Thucydides_ and _Xenophon_. Now _Thucydides_, an unquestionable witness,
tells us, that the news of the death of _Artaxerxes Longimanus_ was brought
to _Ephesus_, and from thence by some _Athenians_ to _Athens_, in the 7th
year of this _Peloponnesian_ war, when the winter half year was running;
and therefore he died _An._ 4 _Olymp._ 88, in the end of _An. J.P._ 4289,
suppose a month or two before midwinter; for so long the news would be in
coming. Now _Artaxerxes Longimanus_ reigned 40 years, by the consent of
_Diodorus_, _Eusebius_, _Jerome_, _Sulpitius_; or 41, according to _Ptol.
in can. Clem. Alexand._ l. 1. _Strom. Chron. Alexandr_. _Abulpharagius_,
_Nicephorus_, including therein the reign of his successors _Xerxes_ and
_Sogdian_, as _Abulpharagius_ informs us. After _Artaxerxes_ reigned his
son _Xerxes_ two months, and _Sogdian_ seven months; but their reign is not
reckoned apart in summing up the years of the Kings, but is included in the
40 or 41 years reign of _Artaxerxes_: omit these nine months, and the
precise reign of _Artaxerxes_ will be thirty nine years and three months.
And therefore since his reign ended in the beginning of winter _An. J.P._
4289, it began between midsummer and autumn, _An. J.P._ 4250.

The same thing I gather also thus. _Cambyses_ began his reign in spring
_An. J.P._ 4185, and reigned eight years, including the five months of
_Smerdes_; and then _Darius Hystaspis_ began in spring _An. J.P._ 4193, and
reigned thirty six years, by the unanimous consent of all Chronologers. The
reigns of these two Kings are determined by three eclipses of the moon
observed at _Babylon_, and recorded by _Ptolemy_; so that it cannot be
disputed. One was in the seventh year of _Cambyses_, _An. J.P._ 4191,
_Jul._ 16, at 11 at night; another in the 20th year of _Darius_, _An. J.P._
4212, _Nov._ 19, at 11h. 45' at night; a third in the 31st year of
_Darius_, _An. J.P._ 4223, _Apr._ 25, at 11h. 30 at night. By these
eclipses, and the Prophecies of _Haggai_ and _Zechary_ compared together,
it is manifest that his years began after the 24th day of the 11th _Jewish_
month, and before the 25th day of _April_, and by consequence about
_March_. _Xerxes_ therefore began in spring _An. J.P._ 4229: for _Darius_
died in the fifth year after the battle at _Marathon_, as _Herodotus_,
_lib._ 7, and _Plutarch_ mention; and that battle was in _October_ _An.
J.P._ 4224, ten years before the battle at _Salamis_. _Xerxes_ therefore
began within less than a year after _October_ _An. J.P._ 4228, suppose in
the spring following: for he spent his first five years, and something
more, in preparations for his expedition against the _Greeks_; and this
expedition was in the time of the _Olympic_ games, _An._ 1 _Olymp._ 75,
_Calliade Athenis Archonte_, 28 years after the _Regifuge_, and Consulship
of the first Consul _Junius Brutus_, _Anno Urbis conditæ_ 273, _Fabio &
Furio Coss._ The passage of _Xerxes_'s army over the _Hellespont_ began in
the end of the fourth year of the 74th _Olympiad_, that is, in _June_ _An.
J.P._ 4234, and took up one month: and in autumn, three months after, on
the full moon, the 16th day of the month _Munychion_, was the battle at
_Salamis_, and a little after that an eclipse of the sun, which by the
calculation fell on _Octob._ 2. His sixth year therefore began a little
before _June_, suppose in spring _An. J.P._ 4234, and his first year
consequently in spring _An. J.P._ 4229, as above. Now he reigned almost
twenty one years, by the consent of all writers. Add the 7 months of
_Artabanus_, and the sum will be 21 years and about four or five months,
which end between midsummer and autumn _An. J.P._ 4250. At this time
therefore began the reign of his successor _Artaxerxes_, as was to be
proved.

The same thing is also confirmed by _Julius Africanus_, who informs us out
of former writers, that the 20th year of this _Artaxerxes_ was the 115th
year from the beginning of the reign of _Cyrus_ in _Persia,_ and fell in
with _An._ 4 _Olymp._ 83. It began therefore with the _Olympic_ year, soon
after the summer Solstice, _An. J.P._ 4269. Subduct nineteen years, and his
first year will begin at the same time of the year _An. J.P._ 4250, as
above.

His 7th year therefore began after midsummer _An. J.P._ 4256; and the
Journey of _Ezra_ to _Jerusalem_ in the spring following fell on the
beginning of _An. J.P._ 4257, as above.

Notes to Chap. X.

[1] Chap. ix. 24, 25, 26, 27.

[2] _Cut upon_. A phrase in _Hebrew_, taken from the practise of numbring
by cutting notches.

[3] Heb. _to seal_, i.e. to finish or consummate: a metaphor taken from
sealing what is finished. So the _Jews_ compute, _ad obsignatum Misna, ad
obsignatum Talmud_, that is, _ad absolutum_.

[4] Heb. _the Prophet_, not the Prophecy.

[5] Heb. _the Messiah_, that is, in _Greek_, _the Christ_; in _English_,
_the Anointed_. I use the _English_ word, that the relation of this clause
to the former may appear.

[6] _Jerusalem_.

[7] See _Isa._ xxiii. 13.

[8] Iren. l. 5. Hær. c. 25.

[9] Apud Hieron. in h. l.

[10] 1 Kings xi. 7.

[11] The antient solar years of the eastern nations consisted of 12 months,
and every month of 30 days: and hence came the division of a circle into
360 degrees. This year seems to be used by _Moses_ in his history of the
Flood, and by _John_ in the _Apocalypse_, where a time, times and half a
time, 42 months and 1260 days, are put equipollent. But in reckoning by
many of these years together, an account is to be kept of the odd days
which were added to the end of these years. For the _Egyptians_ added five
days to the end of this year; and so did the _Chaldeans_ long before the
times of _Daniel_, as appears by the _Æra_, of _Nabonassar_: and the
_Persian_ Magi used the same year of 365 days, till the Empire of the
_Arabians_. The antient _Greeks_ also used the same solar year of 12 equal
months, or 360 days; but every other year added an intercalary month,
consisting of 10 and 11 days alternately.

The year of the _Jews_, even from their coming out of _Egypt_, was
Luni-solar. It was solar, for the harvest always followed the Passover, and
the fruits of the land were always gathered before the feast of
Tabernacles, _Levit._ xxiii. But the months were lunar, for the people were
commanded by _Moses_ in the beginning of every month to blow with trumpets,
and offer burnt offerings with their drink offerings, _Num._ x. 10. xxviii.
11, 14. and this solemnity was kept on the new moons, _Psal._ lxxxi. 3,4,5.
1 _Chron._ xxiii. 31. These months were called by _Moses_ the first,
second, third, fourth month, _&c._ and the first month was also called
_Abib_, the second _Zif_, the seventh _Ethanim_, the eighth _Bull_, _Exod._
xiii. 4. 1 _Kings_ vi. 37, 38. viii. 2. But in the _Babylonian_ captivity
the _Jews_ used the names of the _Chaldean_ months, and by those names
understood the months of their own year; so that the _Jewish_ months then
lost their old names, and are now called by those of the _Chaldeans_.

The _Jews_ began their civil year from the autumnal Equinox, and their
sacred year from the vernal: and the first day of the first month was on
the visible new moon, which was nearest the Equinox.

Whether _Daniel_ used the _Chaldaick_ or _Jewish_ year, is not very
material; the difference being but six hours in a year, and 4 months in 480
years. But I take his months to be _Jewish_: first, because _Daniel_ was a
_Jew_, and the _Jews_ even by the names of the _Chaldean_ months understood
the months of their own year: secondly, because this Prophecy is grounded
on _Jeremiah_'s concerning the 70 years captivity, and therefore must be
understood of the same sort of years with the seventy; and those are
_Jewish_, since that Prophecy was given in _Judea_ before the captivity:
and lastly, because _Daniel_ reckons by weeks of years, which is a way of
reckoning peculiar to the _Jewish_ years. For as their days ran by sevens,
and the last day of every seven was a sabbath; so their years ran by
sevens, and the last year of every seven was a sabbatical year, and seven
such weeks of years made a _Jubilee_.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. XI.

_Of the Times of the Birth and Passion of _Christ__.

The times of the Birth and Passion of _Christ_, with such like niceties,
being not material to religion, were little regarded by the _Christians_ of
the first age. They who began first to celebrate them, placed them in the
cardinal periods of the year; as the annunciation of the Virgin _Mary_, on
the 25th of _March_, which when _Julius Cæsar_ corrected the Calendar was
the vernal Equinox; the feast of _John_ Baptist on the 24th of _June_,
which was the summer Solstice; the feast of St. _Michael_ on _Sept._ 29,
which was the autumnal Equinox; and the birth of _Christ_ on the winter
Solstice, _Decemb._ 25, with the feasts of St. _Stephen_, St. _John_ and
the _Innocents_, as near it as they could place them. And because the
Solstice in time removed from the 25th of _December_ to the 24th, the 23d,
the 22d, and so on backwards, hence some in the following centuries placed
the birth of _Christ_ on _Decemb._ 23, and at length on _Decemb._ 20: and
for the same reason they seem to have set the feast of St. _Thomas_ on
_Decemb._ 21, and that of St. _Matthew_ on _Sept._ 21. So also at the
entrance of the Sun into all the signs in the _Julian_ Calendar, they
placed the days of other Saints; as the conversion of _Paul_ on _Jan._ 25,
when the Sun entred [Aquarius]; St. _Matthias_ on _Feb._ 25, when he entred
[Pisces]; St. _Mark_ on _Apr._ 25, when he entred [Taurus]; _Corpus
Christi_ on _May_ 26, when he entred [Gemini]; St. _James_ on _July_ 25,
when he entred [Cancer]; St. _Bartholomew_ on _Aug._ 24, when he entred
[Virgo]; _Simon_ and _Jude_ on _Octob._ 28, when he entred [Scorpio]: and
if there were any other remarkable days in the _Julian_ Calendar, they
placed the Saints upon them, as St. _Barnabas_ on _June_ 11, where _Ovid_
seems to place the feast of _Vesta_ and _Fortuna_, and the goddess
_Matuta_; and St. _Philip_ and _James_ on the first of _May_, a day
dedicated both to the _Bona Dea_, or _Magna Mater_, and to the goddess
_Flora_, and still celebrated with her rites. All which shews that these
days were fixed in the first _Christian_ Calendars by Mathematicians at
pleasure, without any ground in tradition; and that the _Christians_
afterwards took up with what they found in the Calendars.

Neither was there any certain tradition about the years of _Christ_. For
the _Christians_ who first began to enquire into these things, as _Clemens
Alexandrinus_, _Origen_, _Tertullian_, _Julius Africanus_, _Lactantius_,
_Jerome_, St. _Austin_, _Sulpicius Severus_, _Prosper_, and as many as
place the death of _Christ_ in the 15th or 16th year of _Tiberius_, make
_Christ_ to have preached but one year, or at most but two. At length
_Eusebius_ discovered four successive Passovers in the Gospel of _John_,
and thereupon set on foot an opinion that he preacht three years and an
half; and so died in the 19th year of _Tiberius_. Others afterwards,
finding the opinion that he died in the Equinox _Mar._ 25, more consonant
to the times of the _Jewish_ Passover, in the 17th and 20th years, have
placed his death in one of those two years. Neither is there any greater
certainty in the opinions about the time of his birth. The first
_Christians_ placed his baptism near the beginning of the 15th year of
_Tiberius_; and thence reckoning thirty years backwards, placed his birth
in the 43d _Julian_ year, the 42d of _Augustus_ and 28th of the _Actiac_
victory. This was the opinion which obtained in the first ages, till
_Dionysius Exiguus_, placing the baptism of _Christ_ in the 16th year of
_Tiberius_, and misinterpreting the text of _Luke_, iii. 23. as if _Jesus_
was only beginning to be 30 years old when he was baptized, invented the
vulgar account, in which his birth is placed two years later than before.
As therefore relating to these things there is no tradition worth
considering; let us lay aside all and examine what prejudices can be
gathered from records of good account.

The fifteenth year of _Tiberius_ began _Aug._ 28, _An. J.P._ 4727. So soon
as the winter was over, and the weather became warm enough, we may reckon
that _John_ began to baptize; and that before next winter his fame went
abroad, and all the people came to his baptism, and _Jesus_ among the rest.
Whence the first Passover after his baptism mentioned _John_ ii. 13. was in
the 16th year of _Tiberius_. After this feast _Jesus_ came into the land of
_Judea_, and staid there baptizing, whilst _John_ was baptizing in _Ænon_,
_John_ iii. 22, 23. But when he heard that _John_ was cast into prison, he
departed into _Galilee_, _Mat._ iii. 12. being afraid, because the
Pharisees had heard that he baptized more disciples than _John_, _John_ iv.
1. and in his journey he passed thro' _Samaria_ four months before the
harvest, _John_ iv. 35. that is, about the time of the winter Solstice. For
their harvest was between _Easter_ and _Whitsunday_, and began about a
month after the vernal Equinox. _Say not ye_, saith he, _there are yet four
months, and then cometh harvest? Behold I say unto you, lift up your eyes,
and look on the fields, for they are white already to harvest_; meaning,
that the people in the fields were ready for the Gospel, as his next words
shew[1]. _John_ therefore was imprisoned about _November_, in the 17th year
of _Tiberius_; and _Christ_ thereupon went from _Judea_ to _Cana_ of
_Galilee_ in _December_, and was received there of the _Galileans_, who had
seen all he did at _Jerusalem_ at the Passover: and when a Nobleman of
_Capernaum_ heard he was returned into _Galilee_, and went to him and
desired him to come and cure his son, he went not thither yet, but only
said, _Go thy way, thy son liveth; and the Nobleman returned and found it
so, and believed, he and his house_, John iv. This is the beginning of his
miracles in _Galilee_; and thus far _John_ is full and distinct in relating
the actions of his first year, omitted by the other Evangelists. The rest
of his history is from this time related more fully by the other
Evangelists than by _John_; for what they relate he omits.

From this time therefore _Jesus_ taught in the Synagogues of _Galilee_ on
the sabbath-days, being glorified of all: and coming to his own city
_Nazareth_, and preaching in their Synagogue, they were offended, and
thrust him out of the city, and led him to the brow of the hill on which
the city was built to cast him headlong; but he passing thro' the midst of
them, went his way, and came and dwelt at _Capernaum_, _Luke_ iv. And by
this time we may reckon the second Passover was either past or at hand.

All this time _Matthew_ passeth over in few words, and here begins to
relate the preaching and miracles of _Christ_. _When _Jesus__, saith he,
_had heard that _John_ was cast into prison, he departed into _Galilee_;
and leaving _Nazareth_, he came and dwelt at _Capernaum_, and from that
time began to preach and say, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand_, Matth. iv. 12. Afterwards he called his disciples _Peter_, _Andrew_,
_James_ and _John_; and then _went about all_ Galilee, _teaching in the
Synagogues,--and healing all manner of sickness:--and his fame went
thro'out all _Syria_; and they brought unto him all sick people,--and there
followed him great multitudes of people from _Galilee_, and from
_Decapolis_, and from _Jerusalem_, and from _Judea_, and from beyond
_Jordan__, Matth, iv. 18, 25. All this was done before the sermon in the
mount: and therefore we may certainly reckon that the second Passover was
past before the preaching of that sermon. The multitudes that followed him
from _Jerusalem_ and _Judea_, shew that he had lately been there at the
feast. The sermon in the mount was made when great multitudes came to him
from all places, and followed him in the open fields; which is an argument
of the summer-season: and in this sermon he pointed at the lilies of the
field then in the flower before the eyes of his auditors. _Consider_, saith
he, _the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they
spin; and yet _Solomon_ in all his glory was not arayed like one of these.
Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is and to
morrow is cast into the oven_, &c. _Matth._ vi. 28. So therefore the grass
of the field was now in the flower, and by consequence the month of _March_
with the Passover was past.

Let us see therefore how the rest of the feasts follow in order in
_Matthew_'s Gospel: for he was an eye-witness of what he relates, and so
tells all things in due order of time, which _Mark_ and _Luke_ do not.

Some time after the sermon in the mount, when the time came that he should
be received, that is, when the time of a feast came that he should be
received by the _Jews_, he set his face to go to _Jerusalem_: and as he
went with his disciples in the way, when the _Samaritans_ in his passage
thro' _Samaria_ had denied him lodgings, and a certain Scribe said unto
him, _Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest_, Jesus _said
unto him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but
the Son of man hath not where to lay his head_, Matth. viii. 19. Luke ix.
51, 57. The Scribe told _Christ_ he would bear him company in his journey,
and _Christ_ replied that he wanted a lodging. Now this feast I take to be
the feast of Tabernacles, because soon after I find _Christ_ and his
Apostles on the sea of _Tiberias_ in a storm so great, that the ship was
covered with water and in danger of sinking, till _Christ rebuked the winds
and the sea_, Matth. viii. 23. For this storm shews that winter was now
come on.

After this _Christ_ did many miracles, and _went about all the cities and
villages of _Galilee_, teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the
gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness, and every disease among
the people_, Matth. ix. he then sent forth the twelve to do the like,
_Matth._ x. and at length when he had received a message from _John_, and
answered it, he said to the multitudes, _From the days of _John_ the
Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence_; and upbraided
the cities, _Chorazin_, _Bethsaida_, and _Capernaum_, wherein most of his
mighty works were done, because they repented not, _Matth._ xi. Which
several passages shew, that from the imprisonment of _John_ till now there
had been a considerable length of time: the winter was now past, and the
next Passover was at hand; for immediately after this, _Matthew_, in chap.
xii. subjoins, that _Jesus went on the sabbath-day thro' the corn, and his
disciples were an hungred, and began to pluck the ears of corn and to
eat,--rubbing them_, saith _Luke_, _in their hands_: the corn therefore was
not only in the ear, but ripe; and consequently the Passover, in which the
first-fruits were always offered before the harvest, was now come or past.
_Luke_ calls this sabbath [Greek: deuteroprôton], the second prime sabbath,
that is, the second of the two great feasts of the Passover. As we call
_Easter_ day high _Easter_, and its _octave_ low _Easter_ or _Lowsunday_:
so _Luke_ calls the feast on the seventh day of the unlevened bread, the
second of the two prime sabbaths.

In one of the sabbaths following he went into a Synagogue, and healed a man
with a withered hand, _Matth._ xii. 9. _Luke_ vi. 6. And when the Pharisees
took counsel to destroy him, _he withdrew himself from thence, and great
multitudes followed him; and he healed them all, and charged them that they
should not make him known_, Matth. xii. 14. Afterwards being in a ship, and
the multitude standing on the shore, he spake to them three parables
together, taken from the seeds-men sowing the fields, _Matth._ xiii. by
which we may know that it was now seed-time, and by consequence that the
feast of Tabernacles was past. After this he went _into his own country,
and taught them in their Synagogue_, but _did not many mighty works there
because of their unbelief_. Then the twelve having been abroad a year,
returned, and told _Jesus_ all that they had done: and at the same time
_Herod_ beheaded _John_ in prison, and his disciples came and told _Jesus_;
and when _Jesus_ heard it, he took the twelve and departed thence privately
by ship into a desert place belonging to _Bethsaida_: and the people when
they knew it, followed him on foot out of the cities, the winter being now
past; and he healed their sick, and in the desert fed them to the number of
five thousand men, besides women and children, with only five loaves and
two fishes, _Matth._ xiv. _Luke_ ix. at the doing of which miracle the
Passover of the _Jews_ was nigh, _John_ vi. 4. But _Jesus_ went not up to
this feast; but _after these things walked in _Galilee_, because the
_Jews__ at the Passover before had taken counsel to destroy him, and still
_sought to kill him_, John vii. i. Henceforward therefore he is found first
in the coast of _Tyre_ and _Sidon_, then by the sea of _Galilee_,
afterwards in the coast of _Cæsarea Philippi_; and lastly at _Capernaum_,
_Matth._ xv. 21, 29. xvi. 13. xvii. 34.

Afterwards when the feast of Tabernacles was at hand, his brethren
upbraided him for walking secretly, and urged him to go up to the feast.
But he went not till they were gone, and then went up privately, _John_
vii. 2. and when the _Jews_ sought to stone him, he escaped, _John_ viii.
59. After this he was at the feast of the Dedication in winter, _John_ x.
22. and when they sought again to take him, he fled beyond _Jordan_, _John_
x. 39, 40. _Matth_. xix. 1. where he stayed till the death of _Lazarus_,
and then came to _Bethany_ near _Jerusalem_, and raised him, _John_ xi. 7,
18. whereupon the _Jews_ took counsel from that time to kill him: and
_therefore_ he _walked no more openly among the _Jews_, but went thence
into a country near to the wilderness, into a city called _Ephraim_; and
there continued with his disciples_ till the last Passover, in which the
_Jews_ put him to death, _John_ xi. 53, 54.

Thus have we, in the Gospels of _Matthew_ and _John_ compared together, the
history of _Christ_'s actions in continual order during five Passovers.
_John_ is more distinct in the beginning and end; _Matthew_ in the middle:
what either omits, the other supplies. The first Passover was between the
baptism of _Christ_ and the imprisonment of _John, John_ ii. 13. the second
within four months after the imprisonment of _John_, and _Christ_'s
beginning to preach in _Galilee_, _John_ iv. 35. and therefore it was
either that feast to which _Jesus_ went up, when the Scribe desired to
follow him, _Matth._ viii. 19. _Luke_ ix. 51, 57. or the feast before it.
The third was the next feast after it, when the corn was eared and ripe,
_Matth_, xii. 1. _Luke_ vi. 1. The fourth was that which was nigh at hand
when _Christ_ wrought the miracle of the five loaves, _Matth_. xiv. 15.
_John_ vi. 4, 5. and the fifth was that in which _Christ_ suffered,
_Matth._ xx. 17. _John_ xii. 1.

Between the first and second Passover _John_ and _Christ_ baptized
together, till the imprisonment of _John_, which was four months before the
second. Then _Christ_ began to preach, and call his disciples; and after he
had instructed them a year, lent them to preach in the cities of the
_Jews_: at the same time _John_ hearing of the fame of _Christ_, sent to
him to know who he was. At the third, the chief Priests began to consult
about the death of _Christ_. A little before the fourth, the twelve after
they had preached a year in all the cities, returned to _Christ_; and at
the same time _Herod_ beheaded _John_ in prison, after he had been in
prison two years and a quarter: and thereupon _Christ_ fled into the desart
for fear of _Herod_. The fourth _Christ_ went not up to _Jerusalem_ for
fear of the _Jews_, who at the Passover before had consulted his death, and
because his time was not yet come. Thenceforward therefore till the feast
of Tabernacles he walked in _Galilee_, and that secretly for fear of
_Herod_: and after the feast of Tabernacles he returned no more into
_Galilee_, but sometimes was at _Jerusalem_, and sometimes retired beyond
_Jordan_, or to the city _Ephraim_ by the wilderness, till the Passover in
which he was betrayed, apprehended, and crucified.

_John_ therefore baptized two summers, and _Christ_ preached three. The
first summer _John_ preached to make himself known, in order to give
testimony to _Christ_. Then, after _Christ_ came to his baptism and was
made known to him, he baptized another summer, to make _Christ_ known by
his testimony; and _Christ_ also baptized the same summer, to make himself
the more known: and by reason of _John_'s testimony there came more to
_Christ_'s baptism than to _John_'s. The winter following _John_ was
imprisoned; and now his course being at an end, _Christ_ entered upon his
proper office of preaching in the cities. In the beginning of his preaching
he completed the number of the twelve Apostles, and instructed them all the
first year in order to send them abroad. Before the end of this year, his
fame by his preaching and miracles was so far spread abroad, that the
_Jews_ at the Passover following consulted how to kill him. In the second
year of his preaching, it being no longer safe for him to converse openly
in _Judea_, he sent the twelve to preach in all their cities: and in the
end of the year they returned to him, and told him all they had done. All
the last year the twelve continued with him to be instructed more
perfectly, in order to their preaching to all nations after his death. And
upon the news of _John_'s death, being afraid of _Herod_ as well as of the
_Jews_, he walked this year more secretly than before; frequenting desarts,
and spending the last half of the year in _Judea_, without the dominions of
_Herod_.

Thus have we in the Gospels of _Matthew_ and _John_ all things told in due
order, from the beginning of _John_'s preaching to the death of _Christ_,
and the years distinguished from one another by such essential characters
that they cannot be mistaken. The second Passover is distinguished from the
first, by the interposition of _John_'s imprisonment. The third is
distinguished from the second, by a double character: first, by the
interposition of the feast to which _Christ_ went up, _Mat._ viii. 19.
_Luke_ ix. 57. and secondly, by the distance of time from the beginning of
_Christ_'s preaching: for the second was in the beginning of his preaching,
and the third so long after, that before it came _Christ_ said, _from the
days of _John_ the Baptist until now_, &c. and upbraided the cities of
_Galilee_ for their not repenting at his preaching, and mighty works done
in all that time. The fourth is distinguished from the third, by the
mission of the twelve from _Christ_ to preach in the cities of _Judea_ in
all the interval. The fifth is distinguished from all the former by the
twelve's being returned from preaching, and continuing with _Christ_ during
all the interval, between the fourth and fifth, and by the passion and
other infallible characters.

Now since the first summer of _John_'s baptizing fell in the fifteenth year
of the Emperor _Tiberius_, and by consequence the first of these five
Passovers in his sixteenth year; the last of them, in which _Jesus_
suffered, will fall on the twentieth year of the same Emperor; and by
consequence in the Consulship of _Fabius_ and _Vitellius_, in the 79th
_Julian_ year, and year of _Christ_ 34, which was the sabbatical year of
the _Jews_. And that it did so, I further confirm by these arguments.

I take it for granted that the passion was on friday the 14th day of the
month _Nisan_, the great feast of the Passover on saturday the 15th day of
_Nisan_, and the resurrection on the day following. Now the 14th day of
_Nisan_ always fell on the full moon next after the vernal Equinox; and the
month began at the new moon before, not at the true conjunction, but at the
first appearance of the new moon: for the _Jews_ referred all the time of
the silent moon, as they phrased it, that is, of the moon's disappearing,
to the old moon; and because the first appearance might usually be about 18
hours after the true conjunction, they therefore began their month from the
sixth hour at evening, that is, at sun set, next after the eighteenth hour
from the conjunction. And this rule they called [Hebrew: YH] _Jah_,
designing by the letters [Hebrew: Y] and [Hebrew: H] the number 18.

I know that _Epiphanius_ tells us, if some interpret his words rightly,
that the _Jews_ used a vicious cycle, and thereby anticipated the legal new
moons by two days. But this surely he spake not as a witness, for he
neither understood _Astronomy_ nor _Rabbinical_ learning, but as arguing
from his erroneous hypothesis about the time of the passion. For the _Jews_
did not anticipate, but postpone their months: they thought it lawful to
begin their months a day later than the first appearance of the new moon,
because the new moon continued for more days than one; but not a day
sooner, lest they should celebrate the new moon before there was any. And
the _Jews_ still keep a tradition in their books, that the _Sanhedrim_ used
diligently to define the new moons by sight: sending witnesses into
mountainous places, and examining them about the moon's appearing, and
translating the new moon from the day they had agreed on to the day before,
as often as witnesses came from distant regions, who had seen it a day
sooner than it was seen at _Jerusalem_. Accordingly _Josephus_, one of the
_Jewish_ Priests who ministred in the temple, tells us [2] that the
Passover was kept _on the 14th day of_ Nisan, [Greek: kata selênên]
_according to the moon, when the sun was in _Aries__. This is confirmed
also by two instances, recorded by him, which totally overthrow the
hypothesis of the _Jews_ using a vicious cycle. For that year in which
_Jerusalem_ was taken and destroyed, he saith, the Passover was on the 14th
day of the month _Xanticus_, which according to _Josephus_ is our _April_;
and that five years before, it fell on the 8th day of the same month. Which
two instances agree with the course of the moon.

Computing therefore the new moons of the first month according to the
course of the moon and the rule _Jah_, and thence counting 14 days, I find
that the 14th day of this month in the year of _Christ_ 31, fell on tuesday
_March_ 27; in the year 32, on sunday _Apr._ 13; in the year 33, on friday
_Apr._ 3; in the year 34, on wednesday _March_ 24, or rather, for avoiding
the Equinox which fell on the same day, and for having a fitter time for
harvest, on thursday _Apr._ 22. also in the year 35, on tuesday _Apr._ 12.
and in the year 36, on saturday _March_ 31.

But because the 15th and 21st days of _Nisan_, and a day or two of
_Pentecost_, and the 10th, 15th, and 22d of _Tisri_, were always sabbatical
days or days of rest, and it was inconvenient on two sabbaths together to
be prohibited burying their dead and making ready fresh meat, for in that
hot region their meat would be apt in two days to corrupt: to avoid these
and such like inconveniences, the _Jews_ postponed their months a day, as
often as the first day of the month _Tisri_, or, which is all one, the
third of the month _Nisan_, was sunday, wednesday or friday: and this rule
they called [Hebrew: 'DW] _Adu_, by the letters [Hebrew: W , D , ']
signifying the numbers 1, 4, 6; that is, the 1st, 4th, and 6th days of the
week; which days we call sunday, wednesday and friday. Postponing therefore
by this rule the months found above; the 14th day of the month _Nisan_ will
fall in the year of _Christ_ 31, on wednesday _March_ 28; in the year 32,
on monday _Apr._ 14; in the year 33, on friday _Apr._ 3; in the year 34, on
friday _Apr._ 23; in the year 35, on wednesday _Apr._ 13, and in the year
36, on saturday _March_ 31.

By this computation therefore the year 32 is absolutely excluded, because
the Passion cannot fall on friday without making it five days after the
full moon, or two days before it; whereas it ought to be upon the day of
the full moon, or the next day. For the same reason the years 31 and 35 are
excluded, because in them the Passion cannot fall on friday, without making
it three days after the full moon, or four days before it: errors so
enormous, that they would be very conspicuous in the heavens to every
vulgar eye. The year 36 is contended for by few or none, and both this and
the year 35 may be thus excluded.

_Tiberius_ in the beginning of his reign made _Valerius Gratus_ President
of _Judea_; and after 11 years, substituted _Pontius Pilate_, who governed
10 years. Then _Vitellius_, newly made President of _Syria_, deprived him
of his honour, substituting _Marcellus_, and at length sent him to _Rome_:
but, by reason of delays, _Tiberius_ died before _Pilate_ got thither. In
the mean time _Vitellius_, after he had deposed _Pilate_, came to
_Jerusalem_ in the time of the Passover, to visit that Province as well as
others in the beginning of his office; and in the place of _Caiaphas_, then
High Priest, created _Jonathas_ the son of _Ananus_, or _Annas_ as he is
called in scripture. Afterwards, when _Vitellius_ was returned to
_Antioch_, he received letters from _Tiberius_, to make peace with
_Artabanus_ king of the _Parthians_. At the same time the _Alans_, by the
sollicitation of _Tiberius_, invaded the kingdom of _Artabanus_; and his
subjects also, by the procurement of _Vitellius_, soon after rebelled: for
_Tiberius_ thought that _Artabanus_, thus pressed with difficulties, would
more readily accept the conditions of peace. _Artabanus_ therefore
straightway gathering a greater army, opprest the rebels; and then meeting
_Vitellius_ at _Euphrates_, made a league with the _Romans_. After this
_Tiberius_ commanded _Vitellius_ to make war upon _Aretas_ King of
_Arabia_. He therefore leading his army against _Aretas_, went together
with _Herod_ to _Jerusalem_, to sacrifice at the publick feast which was
then to be celebrated. Where being received honourably, he stayed three
days, and in the mean while translated the high Priesthood from _Jonathas_
to his brother _Theophilus_: and the fourth day, receiving letters of the
death of _Tiberius_, made the people swear allegiance to _Caius_ the new
Emperor; and recalling his army, sent them into quarters. All this is
related by _Josephus_ _Antiq._ _lib._ 18. _c._ 6, 7. Now _Tiberius_ reigned
22 years and 7 months, and died _March_ 16, in the beginning of the year of
_Christ_ 37; and the feast of the Passover fell on _April_ 20 following,
that is, 35 days after the death of _Tiberius_: so that there were about 36
or 38 days, for the news of his death to come from _Rome_ to _Vitellius_ at
_Jerusalem_; which being a convenient time for that message, confirms that
the feast which _Vitellius_ and _Herod_ now went up to was the Passover.
For had it been the Pentecost, as is usually supposed, _Vitellius_ would
have continued three months ignorant of the Emperor's death: which is not
to be supposed. However, the things done between this feast and the
Passover which _Vitellius_ was at before, namely, the stirring up a
sedition in _Parthia_, the quieting that sedition, the making a league
after that with the _Parthians_, the sending news of that league to _Rome_,
the receiving new orders from thence to go against the _Arabians_, and the
putting those orders in execution; required much more time than the fifty
days between the Passover and Pentecost of the same year: and therefore the
Passover which _Vitellius_ first went up to, was in the year before.
Therefore _Pilate_ was deposed before the Passover A.C. 36, and by
consequence the passion of _Christ_ was before that Passover: for he
suffered not under _Vitellius_, nor under _Vitellius_ and _Pilate_
together, but under _Pilate_ alone.

Now it is observable that the high Priesthood was at this time become an
annual office, and the Passover was the time of making a new high Priest.
For _Gratus_ the predecessor of _Pilate_, saith _Josephus_, made _Ismael_
high Priest after _Ananus_; and a while after, suppose a year, deposed him,
and substituted _Eleazar_, and a year after _Simon_, and after another year
_Caiaphas_; and then gave way to _Pilate_. So _Vitellius_ at one Passover
made _Jonathas_ successor to _Caiaphas_, and at the next _Theophilus_ to
_Jonathas_. Hence _Luke_ tells us, that in the 15th year of _Tiberius_,
_Annas_ and _Caiaphas_ were high Priests, that is, _Annas_ till the
Passover, and _Caiaphas_ afterwards. Accordingly _John_ speaks of the high
Priesthood as an annual office: for he tells us again and again, in the
last year of _Christ_'s preaching, that _Caiaphas_ was high Priest for that
year, _John_ xi. 49, 51. xviii. 13. And the next year _Luke_ tells you,
that _Annas_ was high Priest, _Acts_ iv. 6. _Theophilus_ was therefore made
high Priest in the first year of _Caius_, _Jonathas_ in the 22d year of
_Tiberius_, and _Caiaphas_ in the 21st year of the same Emperor: and
therefore, allotting a year to each, the Passion, when _Annas_ succeeded
_Caiaphas_, could not be later than the 20th year of _Tiberius_, A.C. 34.

Thus there remain only the years 33 and 34 to be considered; and the year
33 I exclude by this argument. In the Passover two years before the
Passion, when _Christ_ went thro' the corn, and his disciples pluckt the
ears, and rubbed them with their hands to eat; this ripeness of the corn
shews that the Passover then fell late: and so did the Passover A.C. 32,
_April 14_, but the Passover A.C. 31, _March 28th_, fell very early. It was
not therefore two years after the year 31, but two years after 32 that
_Christ_ suffered.

Thus all the characters of the Passion agree to the year 34; and that is
the only year to which they all agree.

Notes to Chap. XI.

[1] I observe, that _Christ_ and his forerunner _John_ in their parabolical
discourses were wont to allude to things present. The old Prophets, when
they would describe things emphatically, did not only draw parables from
things which offered themselves, as from the rent of a garment, 1 _Sam._
xv. from the sabbatic year, _Isa._ xxxvii. from the vessels of a Potter,
_Jer._ xviii, &c. but also when such fit objects were wanting, they
supplied them by their own actions, as by rending a garment, 1 _Kings_ xi.
by shooting, 2 _Kings_ xiii. by making bare their body, _Isa._ xx. by
imposing significant names to their sons, _Isa._ viii. _Hos._ i. by hiding
a girdle in the bank of _Euphrates_, _Jer._ xiii. by breaking a potter's
vessel, _Jer._ xix. by putting on fetters and yokes, _Jer._ xxvii. by
binding a book to a stone, and casting them both into _Euphrates_, _Jer._
li. by besieging a painted city, _Ezek._ iv. by dividing hair into three
parts, _Ezek._ v. by making a chain, _Ezek._ vii. by carrying out houshold
stuff like a captive and trembling, _Ezek._ xii, &c. By such kind of types
the Prophets loved to speak. And _Christ_ being endued with a nobler
prophetic spirit than the rest, excelled also in this kind of speaking, yet
so as not to speak by his own actions, that was less grave and decent, but
to turn into parables such things as offered themselves. On occasion of the
harvest approaching, he admonishes his disciples once and again of the
spiritual harvest, _John_ iv. 35. _Matth._ ix. 37. Seeing the lilies of the
field, he admonishes his disciples about gay clothing, _Matth._ vi. 28. In
allusion to the present season of fruits, he admonishes his disciples about
knowing men by their fruits, _Matth._ vii. 16. In the time of the Passover,
when trees put forth leaves, he bids his disciples _learn a parable from
the fig tree: when its branch is yet tender and putteth forth leaves, ye
know that summer is nigh_, &c. _Matth._ xxiv. 32. _Luke_ xxi. 29. The same
day, alluding both to the season of the year and to his passion, which was
to be two days after, he formed a parable of the time of fruits
approaching, and the murdering of the heir, _Matth._ xxi. 33. Alluding at
the same time, both to the money-changers whom he had newly driven out of
the Temple, and to his passion at hand; he made a parable of a Noble-man
going into a far country to receive a kingdom and return, and delivering
his goods to his servants, and at his return condemning the slothful
servant because he put not his money to the exchangers, _Matth._ xxv. 14.
_Luke_ xix. 12. Being near the Temple where sheep were kept in folds to be
sold for the sacrifices, he spake many things parabolically of sheep, of
the shepherd, and of the door of the sheepfold; and discovers that he
alluded to the sheepfolds which were to be hired in the market-place, by
speaking of such folds as a thief could not enter by the door, nor the
shepherd himself open, but a porter opened to the shepherd, _John_ x. 1, 3.
Being in the mount of _Olives_, _Matth._ xxxvi. 30. _John_ xiv. 31. a place
so fertile that it could not want vines, he spake many things mystically of
the Husbandman, and of the vine and its branches, _John_ xv. Meeting a
blind man, he admonished of spiritual blindness, _John_ ix. 39. At the
sight of little children, he described once and again the innocence of the
elect, _Matth._ xviii. 2. xix. 13. Knowing that _Lazarus_ was dead and
should be raised again, he discoursed of the resurrection and life eternal,
_John_ xi. 25, 26. Hearing of the slaughter of some whom _Pilate_ had
slain, he admonished of eternal death, _Luke_ xiii. 1. To his fishermen he
spake of fishers of men, _Matth._ iv. 10. and composed another parable
about fishes. _Matth._ xiii. 47. Being by the Temple, he spake of the
Temple of his body, _John_ ii. 19. At supper he spake a parable about the
mystical supper to come in the kingdom of heaven, _Luke_ xiv. On occasion
of temporal food, he admonished his disciples of spiritual food, and of
eating his flesh and drinking his blood mystically, _John_ vi. 27, 53. When
his disciples wanted bread, he bad them beware of the leven of the
Pharisees, _Matth._ xvi. 6. Being desired to eat, he answered that he had
other meat, _John_ iv. 31. In the great day of the feast of Tabernacles,
when the _Jews_, as their custom was, brought a great quantity of waters
from the river _Shiloah_ into the Temple, _Christ_ stood and cried, saying,
_If any man thirst let him come unto me and drink. He that believeth in me,
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water_, John vii. 37. The next
day, in allusion to the servants who by reason of the sabbatical year were
newly set free, he said, _If ye continue in my word, the truth shall make
you free_. Which the _Jews_ understanding literally with respect to the
present manumission of servants, answered, _We be _Abraham_'s seed, and
were never in bondage to any man: how sayeth thou, ye shall be made free?_
John viii. They assert their freedom by a double argument: first, because
they were the seed of _Abraham_, and therefore newly made free, had they
been ever in bondage; and then, because they never were in bondage. In the
last Passover, when _Herod_ led his army thro' _Judea_ against _Aretas_
King of _Arabia_, because _Aretas_ was aggressor and the stronger in
military forces, as appeared by the event; _Christ_ alluding to that state
of things, composed the parable of a weaker King leading his army against a
stronger who made war upon him, _Luke_ xiv. 31. And I doubt not but divers
other parables were formed upon other occasions, the history of which we
have not.

[2] Joseph. Antiq. lib. 3. c. 10.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. XII.

_Of the Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth._

The kingdoms represented by the second and third Beasts, or the Bear and
Leopard, are again described by _Daniel_ in his last Prophecy written in
the third year of _Cyrus_ over _Babylon_, the year in which he conquered
_Persia_. For this Prophecy is a commentary upon the Vision of the Ram and
He-Goat.

_Behold_, saith [1] he, _there shall stand up yet three kings in _Persia__,
[_Cyrus_, _Cambyses_, and _Darius Hystaspes_] _and the fourth_ [_Xerxes_]
_shall be far richer than they all: and by his strength thro' his riches he
shall stir up all against the realm of _Grecia_. And a mighty king_
[_Alexander_ the great] _shall stand up, that shall rule with great
dominion, and do according to his will. And when he shall stand up, his
kingdom shall be broken, and shall be divided towards the four winds of
heaven; and not to his posterity_ [but after their death,] _nor according
to his dominion which he ruled: for his kingdom shall be pluckt up, even
for others besides those_. _Alexander_ the great having conquered all the
_Persian_ Empire, and some part of _India_, died at _Babylon_ a month
before the summer Solstice, in the year of _Nabonassar_ 425: and his
captains gave the monarchy to his bastard brother _Philip Aridæus_, a man
disturbed in his understanding; and made _Perdiccas_ administrator of the
kingdom. _Perdiccas_ with their consent made _Meleager_ commander of the
army, _Seleucus_ master of the horse, _Craterus_ treasurer of the kingdom,
_Antipater_ governor of _Macedon_ and _Greece_, _Ptolemy_ governor of
_Egypt_; _Antigonus_ governor of _Pamphylia_, _Lycia_, _Lycaonia_, and
_Phrygia major_; _Lysimachus_ governor of _Thrace_, and other captains
governors of other Provinces; as many as had been so before in the days of
_Alexander_ the great. The _Babylonians_ began now to count by a new _Æra_,
which they called the _Æra_ of _Philip_, using the years of _Nabonassar_,
and reckoning the 425th year of _Nabonassar_ to be the first year of
_Philip_. _Roxana_ the wife of _Alexander_ being left big with child, and
about three or four months after brought to bed of a son, they called him
_Alexander_, saluted him King, and joined him with _Philip_, whom they had
before placed in the throne. _Philip_ reigned three years under the
administratorship of _Perdiccas_, two years more under the
administratorship of _Antipater_, and above a year more under that of
_Polyperchon_; in all six years and four months; and then was slain with
his Queen _Eurydice_ in _September_ by the command of _Olympias_ the mother
of _Alexander_ the great. The _Greeks_ being disgusted at the cruelties of
_Olympias_, revolted to _Cassander_ the son and successor of _Antipater_.
_Cassander_ affecting the dominion of _Greece_, slew _Olympias_; and soon
after shut up the young king _Alexander_, with his mother _Roxana_, in the
castle of _Amphipolis_, under the charge of _Glaucias_, _An. Nabonass._
432. The next year _Ptolemy_, _Cassander_ and _Lysimachus_, by means of
_Seleucus_, form'd a league against _Antigonus_; and after certain wars
made peace with him, _An. Nabonass._ 438, upon these conditions: that
_Cassander_ should command the forces of _Europe_ till _Alexander_ the son
of _Roxana_ came to age; and that _Lysimachus_ should govern _Thrace_,
_Ptolemy_ _Egypt_ and _Lybia_, and _Antigonus_ all _Asia_. _Seleucus_ had
possest himself of _Mesopotamia_, _Babylonia_, _Sustana_ and _Media_, the
year before. About three years after _Alexander_'s death he was made
governor of _Babylon_ by _Antipater_; then was expelled by _Antigonus_; but
now he recovered and enlarged his government over a great part of the
_East_: which gave occasion to a new _Æra_, called _Æra Seleucidarum_. Not
long after the peace made with _Antigonus_, _Diodorus_ saith the same
_Olympic_ year; _Cassander_, seeing that _Alexander_ the son of _Roxana_
grew up, and that it was discoursed thro'out _Macedonia_ that it was fit he
should be set at liberty, and take upon him the government of his father's
kingdom, commanded _Glaucias_ the governor of the castle to kill _Roxana_
and the young king _Alexander_ her son, and conceal their deaths. Then
_Polyperchon_ set up _Hercules_, the son of _Alexander_ the great by
_Barsinè_, to be king; and soon after, at the sollicitation of _Cassander_,
caused him to be slain. Soon after that, upon a great victory at sea got by
_Demetrius_ the son of _Antigonus_ over _Ptolemy_, _Antigonus_ took upon
himself the title of king, and gave the same title to his son. This was
_An. Nabonass._ 441. After his example, _Seleucus_, _Cassander_,
_Lysimachus_ and _Ptolemy_, took upon themselves the title and dignity of
kings, having abstained from this honour while there remained any of
_Alexander_'s race to inherit the crown. Thus the monarchy of the _Greeks_
for want of an heir was broken into several kingdoms; four of which, seated
_to the four winds of heaven_, were very eminent. For _Ptolemy_ reigned
over _Egypt_, _Lybia_ and _Ethiopia_; _Antigonus_ over _Syria_ and the
lesser _Asia_; _Lysimachus_ over _Thrace_; and _Cassander_ over _Macedon_,
_Greece_ and _Epirus_, as above.

_Seleucus_ at this time reigned over the nations which were beyond
_Euphrates_, and belonged to the bodies of the two first Beasts; but after
six years he conquered _Antigonus_, and thereby became possest of one of
the four kingdoms. For _Cassander_ being afraid of the power of
_Antigonus_, combined with _Lysimachus_, _Ptolemy_ and _Seleucus_, against
him: and while _Lysimachus_ invaded the parts of _Asia_ next the
_Hellespont_, _Ptolemy_ subdued _Phoenicia_ and _Coelosyria_, with the
sea-coasts of _Asia_.

_Seleucus_ came down with a powerful army into _Cappadocia_, and joining
the confederate forces, fought _Antigonus_ in _Phrygia_ and flew him, and
seized his kingdom, _An. Nabonass._ 447. After which _Seleucus_ built
_Antioch_, _Seleucia_, _Laodicea_, _Apamea_, _Berrhæa_, _Edessa_, and other
cities in _Syria_ and _Asia_; and in them granted the _Jews_ equal
privileges with the _Greeks_.

_Demetrius_ the son of _Antigonus_ retained but a small part of his
father's dominions, and at length lost _Cyprus_ to _Ptolemy_; but
afterwards killing _Alexander_, the son and successor of _Cassander_ king
of _Macedon_, he seized his kingdom, _An. Nabonass._ 454. Sometime after,
preparing a very great army to recover his father's dominions in _Asia_;
_Seleucus_, _Ptolemy_, _Lysimachus_ and _Pyrrhus_ king of _Epirus_,
combined against him; and _Pyrrhus_ invading _Macedon_, corrupted the army
of _Demetrius_, put him to flight, seized his kingdom, and shared it with
_Lysimachus_. After seven months, _Lysimachus_ beating _Pyrrhus_, took
_Macedon_ from him, and held it five years and a half, uniting the kingdoms
of _Macedon_ and _Thrace_. _Lysimachus_ in his wars with _Antigonus_ and
_Demetrius_, had taken from them _Caria_, _Lydia_, and _Phrygia_; and had a
treasury in _Pergamus_, a castle on the top of a conical hill in _Phrygia_,
by the river _Caicus_, the custody of which he had committed to one
_Philetærus_, who was at first faithful to him, but in the last year of his
reign revolted. For _Lysimachus_, having at the instigation of his wife
_Arsinoe_, slain first his own son _Agathocles_, and then several that
lamented him; the wife of _Agathocles_ fled with her children and brothers,
and some others of their friends, and sollicited _Seleucus_ to make war
upon _Lysimachus_; whereupon _Philetærus_ also, who grieved at the death of
_Agathocles_, and was accused thereof by _Arsinoe_, took up arms, and sided
with _Seleucus_. On this occasion _Seleucus_ and _Lysimachus_ met and
fought in _Phrygia_; and _Lysimachus_ being slain in the battel, lost his
kingdom to _Seleucus_, _An. Nabonass._ 465. Thus the Empire of the
_Greeks_, which at first brake into four kingdoms, became now reduced into
two notable ones, henceforward called by _Daniel_ the kings of the _South_
and _North_. For _Ptolemy_ now reigned over _Egypt_, _Lybia_, _Ethiopia_,
_Arabia_, _Phoenicia_, _Coelosyria_, and _Cyprus_; and _Seleucus_, having
united three of the four kingdoms, had a dominion scarce inferior to that
of the _Persian_ Empire, conquered by _Alexander_ the great. All which is
thus represented by _Daniel_:[2] _And the king of the_ South [_Ptolemy_]
_shall be strong, and one of his Princes_ [_Seleucus_, one of _Alexander_'s
Princes] _shall be strong above him, and have dominion; his dominion shall
be a great dominion_.

After _Seleucus_ had reigned seven months over _Macedon_, _Greece_,
_Thrace_, _Asia_, _Syria_, _Babylonia_, _Media_, and all the _East_ as far
as _India_; _Ptolemy Ceraunus_, the younger brother of _Ptolemy
Philadelphus_ king of _Egypt_, slew him treacherously, and seized his
dominions in _Europe_: while _Antiochus Soter_, the son of _Seleucus_,
succeeded his father in _Asia_, _Syria_, and most of the _East_; and after
nineteen or twenty years was succeeded by his son _Antiochus Theos_; who
having a lasting war with _Ptolemy Philadelphus_, at length composed the
same by marrying _Berenice_ the daughter of _Philadelphus_: but after a
reign of fifteen years, his first wife _Laodice_ poisoned him, and set her
son _Seleucus Callinicus_ upon the throne. _Callinicus_ in the beginning of
his reign, by the impulse of his mother _Laodice_, besieged _Berenice_ in
_Daphne_ near _Antioch_, and slew her with her young son and many of her
women. Whereupon _Ptolemy Euergetes_, the son and successor of
_Philadelphus_, made war upon _Callinicus_; took from him _Phoenicia_,
_Syria_, _Cilicia_, _Mesopotamia_, _Babylonia_, _Sustana_, and some other
regions; and carried back into _Egypt_ 40000 talents of silver, and 2500
images of the Gods, amongst which were the Gods of _Egypt_ carried away by
_Cambyses_. _Antiochus Hierax_ at first assisted his brother _Callinicus_,
but afterwards contended with him for _Asia_. In the mean time _Eumenes_
governor of _Pergamus_ beat _Antiochus_, and took from them both all _Asia_
westward of mount _Taurus_. This was in the fifth year of _Callinicus_, who
after an inglorious reign of 20 years was succeeded by his son _Seleucus
Ceraunus_; and _Euergetes_ after four years more, _An. Nabonass._ 527, was
succeeded by his son _Ptolemy Philopator_. All which is thus signified by
_Daniel_:[3] _And in the end of years they_ [the kings of the _South_ and
_North_] _shall join themselves together: for the king's daughter of the_
South [_Berenice_] _shall come to the king of the _North_ to make an
agreement, but she shall not retain the power of the arm; neither shall she
stand, nor her seed, but she shall be delivered up, and he_ [_Callinicus_]
_that brought her, and he whom she brought forth, and they that strengthned
her in_ [those] _times_, [or defended her in the siege of _Daphne_.] _But
out of a branch of her roots shall one stand up in his seat_ [her brother
_Euergetes_] _who shall come with an army, and shall enter into the
fortress_ [or fenced cities] _of the king of the _North_, and shall act
against them and prevail: and shall carry captives into _Egypt_, their Gods
with their Princes and precious vessels of silver and gold; and he shall
continue some years after the king of the_ North.

_Seleucus Ceraunus_, inheriting the remains of his father's kingdom, and
thinking to recover the rest, raised a great army against the governor of
_Pergamus_, now King thereof, but died in the third year of his reign. His
brother and successor, _Antiochus Magnus_, carrying on the war, took from
the King of _Pergamus_ almost all the lesser _Asia_, recovering also the
Provinces of _Media_, _Persia_ and _Babylonia_, from the governors who had
revolted: and in the fifth year of his reign invading _Coelosyria_, he with
little opposition possest himself of a good part thereof; and the next year
returning to invade the rest of _Coelosyria_ and _Phoenicia_, beat the army
of _Ptolemy Philopator_ near _Berytus_; he then invaded _Palestine_ and the
neighbouring parts of _Arabia_, and the third year returned with an army of
78000: but _Ptolemy_ coming out of _Egypt_ with an army of 75000, fought
and routed him at _Raphia_ near _Gaza_, between _Palestine_ and _Egypt_;
and recovered all _Phoenicia_ and _Coelosyria_, _Ann. Nabonass._ 532. Being
puffed up with this victory, and living in all manner of luxury, the
_Egyptians_ revolted, and had wars with him, but were overcome; and in the
broils sixty thousand _Egyptian Jews_ were slain. All which is thus
described by _Daniel_: [4] _But his sons_ [_Seleucus Ceraunus_, and
_Antiochus Magnus_, the sons of _Callinicus_] _shall be stirred up, and
shall gather a great army; and he_ [_Antiochus Magnus_] _shall come
effectually and overflow, and pass thro' and return, and_ [again the next
year] _be stirred up_ [marching even] _to his fortress_, [the frontier
towns of _Egypt_;] _and the King of the _South_ shall be moved with choler,
and come forth_ [the third year] _and fight with him, even with the King of
the _North_; and he_ [the King of the _North_] _shall lead forth a great
multitude, but the multitude shall be given into his hand. And the
multitude being taken away, his heart shall be lifted up, and he shall cast
down many ten thousands; but he shall not be strengthned by it: for the
king of the _North_ shall return_, &c.

About twelve years after the battle between _Philopator_ and _Antiochus_,
_Philopator_ died; and left his kingdom to his young son _Ptolemy
Epiphanes_, a child of five years old. Thereupon _Antiochus Magnus_
confederated with _Philip_ king of _Macedon_, that they should each invade
the dominions of _Epiphanes_ which lay next to them. Hence arose a various
war between _Antiochus_ and _Epiphanes_, each of them seizing _Phoenicia_
and _Coelosyria_ by turns; whereby those countries were much afflicted by
both parties. First _Antiochus_ seized them; then one _Scopas_ being sent
with the army of _Egypt_, recovered them from _Antiochus_: the next year,
_An. Nabonass._ 550, _Antiochus_ fought and routed _Scopas_ near the
fountains of _Jordan_, besieged him in _Sidon_, took the city, and
recovered _Syria_ and _Phoenicia_ from _Egypt_, the _Jews_ coming over to
him voluntarily. But about three years after, preparing for a war against
the _Romans_, he came to _Raphia_ on the borders of _Egypt_; made peace
with _Epiphanes_, and gave him his daughter _Cleopatra_: next autumn he
passed the _Hellespont_ to invade the cities of _Greece_ under the _Roman_
protection, and took some of them; but was beaten by the _Romans_ the
summer following, and forced to return back with his army into _Asia_.
Before the end of the year the fleet of _Antiochus_ was beaten by the fleet
of the _Romans_ near _Phocæa_: and at the same time _Epiphanes_ and
_Cleopatra_ sent an embassy to _Rome_ to congratulate the _Romans_ on their
success against their father _Antiochus_, and to exhort them to prosecute
the war against him into _Asia_. The _Romans_ beat _Antiochus_ again at sea
near _Ephesus_, past their army over the _Hellespont_, and obtain'd a great
victory over him by land, took from him all _Asia_ westward of mount
_Taurus_, gave it to the King of _Pergamus_ who assisted them in the war;
and imposed a large tribute upon _Antiochus_. Thus the King of _Pergamus_,
by the power of the _Romans_, recovered what _Antiochus_ had taken from
him; and _Antiochus_ retiring into the remainder of his kingdom, was slain
two years after by the _Persians_, as he was robbing the Temple of _Jupiter
Belus_ in _Elymais_, to raise money for the _Romans_. All which is thus
described by _Daniel_. [5] _For the King of the_ North [_Antiochus_] _shall
return, and shall set forth a multitude greater than the former; and shall
certainly come, after certain years, with a great army and with much
riches. And in those times there shall many stand up against the King of
the_ South, [particularly the _Macedonians_;] _also the robbers of thy
people_ [the _Samaritans_, &c.] _shall exalt themselves to establish the
vision, but they shall fall. So the King of the _North_ shall come, and
cast up a mount, and take the most fenced cities; and the arms of the
_South_ shall not withstand, neither his chosen people, neither shall there
he any strength to withstand. But he that cometh against him shall do
according to his own will, and none shall stand before him: and he shall
stand in the glorious land, which shall fail in his hand. He shall also set
his face to go with the strength_ [or army] _of all his kingdom, and make
an agreement with him_ [at _Raphia_;] _and he shall give him the daughter
of women corrupting her; but she shall not stand his side, neither be for
him. After this he shall turn his face unto the Isles, and shall take many:
but a Prince for his own behalf_ [the _Romans_] _shall cause the reproach
offered by him to cease; without his own reproach he shall cause it to turn
upon him. Then he shall turn his face towards the fort of his own land: but
he shall stumble and fall, and not be found._

_Seleucus Philopator_ succeeded his father _Antiochus_, _Anno Nabonass._
561, and reigned twelve years, but did nothing memorable, being sluggish,
and intent upon raising money for the _Romans_ to whom he was tributary. He
was slain by _Heliodorus_, whom he had sent to rob the Temple of
_Jerusalem_. _Daniel_ thus describes his reign. [6] _Then shall stand up in
his estate a raiser of taxes in the glory of the kingdom, but within few
days be shall be destroyed, neither in anger nor in battle._

A little before the death of _Philopator_, his son _Demetrius_ was sent
hostage to _Rome_, in the place of _Antiochus Epiphanes_, the brother of
_Philopator_; and _Antiochus_ was at _Athens_ in his way home from _Rome_,
when _Philopator_ died: whereupon _Heliodorus_ the treasurer of the
kingdom, stept into the throne. But _Antiochus_ so managed his affairs,
that the _Romans_ kept _Demetrius_ at _Rome_; and their ally the King of
_Pergamus_ expelled _Heliodorus_, and placed _Antiochus_ in the throne,
while _Demetrius_ the right heir remained an hostage at _Rome_. _Antiochus_
being thus made King by the friendship of the King of _Pergamus_ reigned
powerfully over _Syria_ and the neighbouring nations: but carried himself
much below his dignity, stealing privately out of his palace, rambling up
and down the city in disguise with one or two of his companions; conversing
and drinking with people of the lowest rank, foreigners and strangers;
frequenting the meetings of dissolute persons to feast and revel; clothing
himself like the _Roman_ candidates and officers, acting their parts like a
mimick, and in publick festivals jesting and dancing with servants and
light people, exposing himself by all manner of ridiculous gestures. This
conduct made some take him for a madman, and call him _Antiochus_ [Greek:
Epimenês]. In the first year of his reign he deposed _Onias_ the
high-Priest, and sold the high-Priesthood to _Jason_ the younger brother of
_Onias_: for _Jason_ had promised to give him 440 talents of silver for
that office, and 15 more for a licence to erect a place of exercise for the
training up of youth in the fashions of the heathen; which licence was
granted by the King, and put in execution by _Jason_. Then the King sending
one _Apollonius_ into _Egypt_ to the coronation of _Ptolemy Philometor_,
the young son of _Philometor_ and _Cleopatra_, and knowing _Philometor_ not
to be well affected to his affairs in _Phoenicia_, provided for his own
safety in those parts; and for that end came to _Joppa_ and _Jerusalem_,
where he was honourably received; from thence he went in like manner with
his little army to the cities of _Phoenicia_, to establish himself against
_Egypt_, by courting the people, and distributing extraordinary favours
amongst them. All which is thus represented by _Daniel_. [7] _And in his_
[_Philometor_'s] _estate shall stand up a vile person, to whom they_ [the
_Syrians_ who set up _Heliodorus_] _shall not give the honour of the
kingdom. Yet he shall come in peaceably, and obtain the kingdom by
flatteries_ [made principally to the King of _Pergamus_;] _and the arms_
[which in favour of _Heliodorus_ oppose him] _shall be overflowed with a
food from before him, and be broken; yea also_ [_Onias_ the high-Priest]
_the Prince of the covenant. And after the league made with him,_ [the King
of _Egypt_, by sending _Apollonius_ to his coronation] _he shall work
deceitfully_ [against the King of _Egypt_,] _for he shall come up and shall
become strong_ [in _Phoenicia _] _with a small people. And he shall enter
into the quiet and plentiful cities of the Province_ [of _Phoenicia_;]
_and_ [to ingratiate himself with the _Jews_ of _Phoenicia_ and _Egypt_,
and with their friends] _he shall do that which his fathers have not done,
nor his fathers fathers: he shall scatter among them the prey and the
spoil, and the riches_ [exacted from other places;] _and shall forecast his
devices against the strong holds_ [of _Egypt_] _even for a time._

These things were done in the first year of his reign, _An. Nabonass._ 573.
And thenceforward he forecast his devices against the strong holds of
_Egypt_, until the sixth year. For three years after, that is in the fourth
year of his reign, _Menelaus_ bought the high-Priesthood from _Jason_, but
not paying the price was sent for by the King; and the King, before he
could hear the cause, went into _Cilicia_ to appease a sedition there, and
left _Andronicus_ his deputy at _Antioch_; in the mean time the brother of
_Menelaus_, to make up the money, conveyed several vessels out of the
Temple, selling some of them at _Tyre_, and sending others to _Andronicus_.
When _Menelaus_ was reproved for this by _Onias_, he caused _Onias_ to be
slain by _Andronicus_: for which fact the King at his return from _Cilicia_
caused _Andronicus_ to be put to death. Then _Antiochus_ prepared his
second expedition against _Egypt_, which he performed in the sixth year of
his reign, _An. Nabonass._ 578: for upon the death of _Cleopatra_, the
governors of her son the young King of _Egypt_ claimed _Phoenicia_ and
_Coelosyria_ from him as her dowry; and to recover those countries raised a
great army. _Antiochus_ considering that his father had not quitted the
possession of those countries[8], denied they were her dowry; and with
another great army met and fought the _Egyptians_ on the borders of
_Egypt_, between _Pelusium_ and the mountain _Casius_. He there beat them,
and might have destroyed their whole army, but that he rode up and down,
commanding his soldiers not to kill them, but to take them alive: by which
humanity he gained _Pelusium_, and soon after all _Egypt_; entring it with
a vast multitude of foot and chariots, elephants and horsemen, and a great
navy. Then seizing the cities of _Egypt_ as a friend, he marched to
_Memphis_, laid the whole blame of the war upon _Eulæus_ the King's
governor, entred into outward friendship with the young King, and took upon
him to order the affairs of the kingdom. While _Aniochus_ was thus
employ'd, a report being spread in _Phoenicia_ that he was dead, _Jason_ to
recover the high-Priesthood assaulted _Jerusalem_ with above a thousand
men, and took the city: hereupon the King thinking _Judea_ had revolted,
came out of _Egypt_ in a furious manner, re-took the city, slew forty
thousand of the people, made as many prisoners, and sold them to raise
money; went into the Temple, spoiled it of its treasures, ornaments,
utensils, and vessels of gold and silver, amounting to 1800 talents; and
carried all away to _Antioch_. This was done in the year of _Nabonassar_
578, and is thus described by _Daniel_. [9] _And he shall stir up his
power, and his courage against the King of the _South_ with a great army;
and the King of the _South_ shall be stirrd up to battle with a very great
and mighty army; but he shall not stand: for they_, even _Antiochus_ and
his friends, _shall forecast devices against him_, as is represented above;
_yea, they that feed of the portion of his meat, shall_ betray and _destroy
him, and his army shall be overthrown, and many shall fall down slain. And
both these Kings hearts shall be to do mischief; and they_, being now made
friends, _shall speak lyes at one table_, against the _Jews_ and against
the holy covenant; _but it shall not prosper: for yet the end_, in which
the setting up of the abomination of desolation is to prosper, _shall be at
the time appointed. Then shall he return into his land with great riches,
and his heart shall be against the holy covenant; and he shall act_,
against it by spoiling the Temple, _and return into his own land_.

The _Egyptians_ of _Alexandria_ seeing _Philometor_ first educated in
luxury by the Eunuch _Eulæus_, and now in the hands of _Antiochus_, gave
the kingdom to _Euergetes_, the younger brother of _Philometor_. Whereupon
_Antiochus_ pretending to restore _Philometor_, made war upon _Euergetes_;
beat him at sea, and besieged him and his sister _Cleopatra_ in
_Alexandria_: while the besieged Princes sent to _Rome_ to implore the
assistance of the Senate. _Antiochus_ finding himself unable to take the
city that year, returned into _Syria_, leaving _Philometor_ at _Memphis_ to
govern _Egypt_ in his absence. But _Philometor_ made friendship with his
brother that winter; and _Antiochus_, returning the next spring _An.
Nabonass._ 580, to besiege both the brothers in _Alexandria_, was met in
the way by the _Roman_ Ambassadors, _Popilius Læna_, _C. Decimius_, and _C.
Hostilius_: he offered them his hand to kiss, but _Popilius_ delivering to
him the tables wherein the message of the Senate was written, bad him read
those first. When he had read them, he replied he would consider with his
friends what was fit to be done; but _Popilius_ drawing a circle about him,
bad him answer before he went out of it: _Antiochus_, astonished at this
blunt and unusual imperiousness, made answer he would do what the _Romans_
demanded; and then _Popilius_ gave the King his hand to kiss, and he
returned out of _Egypt_. The same year, _An. Nabonass._ 580, his captains
by his order spoiled and slaughtered the _Jews_, profaned the Temple, set
up the worship of the heathen Gods in all _Judea_, and began to persecute
and make war upon those who would not worship them: which actions are thus
described by _Daniel_. [10] _At the time appointed he shall come_ again
_towards the _South_, but the latter shall not be as the former. For the
ships of _Chittim_ shall come_, with an embassy from _Rome_, _against him.
Therefore he shall be grieved, and return, and have indignation against the
holy covenant. So shall he do; he shall even return, and have intelligence
with them that forsake the holy covenant._

In the same year that _Antiochus_ by the command of the _Romans_ retired
out of _Egypt_, and set up the worship of the _Greeks_ in _Judea_; the
_Romans_ conquered the kingdom of _Macedon_, the fundamental kingdom of the
Empire of the _Greeks_, and reduced it into a _Roman_ Province; and thereby
began to put an end to the reign of _Daniel_'s third Beast. This is thus
exprest by _Daniel_. _And after him Arms_, that is the _Romans_, _shall
stand up_. As [Hebrew: MMLK] signifies _after the King_, Dan. xi. 8; so
[Hebrew: MMNW] may signify _after him_. _Arms_ are every where in this
Prophecy of _Daniel_ put for the military power of a kingdom: and they
stand up when they conquer and grow powerful. Hitherto _Daniel_ described
the actions of the Kings of the _North_ and _South_; but upon the conquest
of _Macedon_ by the _Romans_, he left off describing the actions of the
_Greeks_, and began to describe those of the _Romans_ in _Greece_. They
conquered _Macedon_, _Illyricum_ and _Epirus_, in the year of _Nabonassar_
580. 35 years after, by the last will and testament of _Attalus_ the last
King of _Pergamus_, they inherited that rich and flourishing kingdom, that
is, all _Asia_ westward of mount _Taurus_; 69 years after they conquered
the kingdom of _Syria_, and reduced it into a Province, and 34 years after
they did the like to _Egypt_. By all these steps the _Roman_ Arms stood up
over the _Greeks_: and after 95 years more, by making war upon the _Jews_,
_they polluted the sanctuary of strength, and took away the daily
sacrifice, and then placed the abomination of desolation_. For this
abomination was placed after the days of _Christ_, _Math._ xxiv. 15. In the
16th year of the Emperor _Adrian_, A.C. 132, they placed this abomination
by building a Temple to _Jupiter Capitolinus_, where the Temple of God in
_Jerusalem_ had stood. Thereupon the _Jews_ under the conduct of
_Barchochab_ rose up in arms against the _Romans_, and in the war had 50
cities demolished, 985 of their best towns destroyed, and 580000 men slain
by the sword; and in the end of the war, A.C. 136, were banished _Judea_
upon pain of death, and thenceforward the land remained desolate of its old
inhabitants.

In the beginning of the _Jewish_ war in _Nero_'s reign, the Apostles fled
out of _Judea_ with their flocks; some beyond _Jordan_ to _Pella_ and other
places, some into _Egypt_, _Syria_, _Mesopotamia_, _Asia minor_, and
elsewhere. _Peter_ and _John_ came into _Asia_, and _Peter_ went thence by
_Corinth_ to _Rome_; but _John_ staying in _Asia_, was banished by the
_Romans_ into _Patmos_, as the head of a party of the _Jews_, whose nation
was in war with the _Romans_. By this dispersion of the _Christian Jews_,
the _Christian_ religion, which was already propagated westward as far as
_Rome_, spred fast into all the _Roman_ Empire, and suffered many
persecutions under it till the days of _Constantine_ the great and his
sons: all which is thus described by _Daniel_. [11] _And such as do
wickedly against the covenant, shall he_, who places the abomination,
_cause to dissemble_, and worship the heathen Gods; _but the people_ among
them _who do know their God, shall be strong and act. And they that
understand among the people, shall instruct many: yet they shall fall by
the sword, and by flame, and by captivity, and by spoil many days. Now when
they shall fall, they shall be holpen with a little help, viz._ in the
reign of _Constantine_ the great; _and_ at that time by reason of their
prosperity, _many shall_ come over to them from among the heathen, and
_cleave to them with dissimulation. But of those of understanding there
shall_ still _fall to try_ God's people _by them and to purge_ them from
the dissemblers, _and to make them white even to the time of the end:
because it is yet for a time appointed._

Hitherto the _Roman_ Empire continued entire; and under this dominion, the
little horn of the He-Goat continued _mighty, but not by his own power_.
But now, by the building of _Constantinople_, and endowing it with a Senate
and other like privileges with _Rome_; and by the division of the _Roman_
Empire into the two Empires of the _Greeks_ and _Latins_, headed by those
two cities; a new scene of things commences, in which which [12] _a King_,
the Empire of the _Greeks_, _doth according to his will, and_, by setting
his own laws above the laws of God, _exalts and magnifies himself above
every God, and speaks marvellous things against the God of Gods, and shall
prosper till the indignation be accomplished.--Neither shall he regard the
God of his fathers, nor the_ lawful _desire of women_ in matrimony, _nor
any God, but shall magnify himself above all. And in his seat he shall
honour _Mahuzzims__, that is, strong guardians, the souls of the dead;
_even with a God whom his fathers knew not shall he honour them_, in their
Temples, _with gold and silver, and with precious stones and valuable
things_. All which relates to the overspreading of the _Greek_ Empire with
Monks and Nuns, who placed holiness in abstinence from marriage; and to the
invocation of saints and veneration of their reliques, and such like
superstitions, which these men introduced in the fourth and fifth
centuries. [13] _And at the time of the end the King of the_ South, or the
Empire of the _Saracens_, _shall push at him_; _and the King of the_ North,
or Empire of the _Turks_, _shall come against him like a whirlwind, with
chariots and with horsemen, and with many ships_; _and be shall enter into
the countries_ of the _Greeks_, _and shall overflow and pass over. He shall
enter also into the glorious land, and many countries shall be overthrown;
but these shall escape out of his hand, even _Edom_ and _Moab_, and the
chief of the children_ Ammon: that is, those to whom his Caravans pay
tribute. _He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries, and the
land of _Egypt_ shall not escape_; _but he shall have power over the
treasures of gold and silver, and over all the precious things of _Egypt_;
and the _Lybians_ and _Ethiopians_ shall be at his steps_. All these
nations compose the Empire of the _Turks_, and therefore this Empire is
here to be understood by the King of the _North_. They compose also the
body of the He-Goat; and therefore the Goat still reigns in his last horn,
but not by his own power.

Notes to Chap. XII.

[1] Chap. xi. 2, 3, 4.

[2] Chap. xi. 5.

[3] Chap. xi. 6, 7, 8.

[4] Chap. xi. 10, &c.

[5] Chap. xi. 13-19.

[6] Chap. xi. 20.

[7] Chap. xi. 21, &c.

[8] 2 Maccab. iii. 5, 8. & iv. 4.

[9] Chap. xi. 25, &c.

[10] Chap. xi. 29, 30.

[11] Chap. xi. 32, &c.

[12] Chap. xi. 36, &c.

[13] Chap. xi. 40, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. XIII.

_Of the King who did according to his will, and magnified himself above
every God, and honoured _Mahuzzims_, and regarded not the desire of women_.

In the first ages of the Christian religion the Christians of every city
were governed by a Council of Presbyters, and the President of the Council
was the Bishop of the city. The Bishop and Presbyters of one city meddled
not with the affairs of another city, except by admonitory letters or
messages. Nor did the Bishops of several cities meet together in Council
before the time of the Emperor _Commodus_: for they could not meet together
without the leave of the _Roman_ governors of the Provinces. But in the
days of that Emperor they began to meet in Provincial Councils, by the
leave of the governors; first in _Asia_, in opposition to the
_Cataphrygian_ Heresy, and soon after in other places and upon other
occasions. The Bishop of the chief city, or Metropolis of the _Roman_
Province, was usually made President of the Council; and hence came the
authority of Metropolitan Bishops above that of other Bishops within the
same Province. Hence also it was that the Bishop of _Rome_ in _Cyprian_'s
days called himself the Bishop of Bishops. As soon as the Empire became
Christian, the _Roman_ Emperors began to call general Councils out of all
the Provinces of the Empire; and by prescribing to them what points they
should consider, and influencing them by their interest and power, they set
up what party they pleased. Hereby the _Greek_ Empire, upon the division of
the _Roman_ Empire into the _Greek_ and _Latin_ Empires, became _the King
who_, in matters of religion, _did according to his will_; _and_, in
legislature, _exalted and magnified himself above every God_: and at
length, by the seventh general Council, established the worship of the
images and souls of dead men, here called _Mahuzzims_.

The same King placed holiness in abstinence from marriage. _Eusebius_ in
his Ecclesiastical history [1] tells us, that _Musanus_ wrote a tract
against those who fell away to the heresy of the _Encratites_, which was
then newly risen, and had introduced pernicious errors; and that _Tatian_,
the disciple of _Justin_, was the author thereof; and that _Irenæus_ in his
first book against heresies teaches this, writing of _Tatian_ and his
heresy in these words: _A Saturnino & Marcione profecti qui vocantur
Continentes, docuerunt non contrahendum esse matrimonium; reprobantes
scilicet primitivum illud opificium Dei, & tacitè accusantes Deum qui
masculum & fæminam condidit ad procreationem generis humani. Induxerunt
etiam abstinentiam ab esu eorum quæ animalia appellant, ingratos se
exhibentes ergo eum qui universa creavit Deum. Negant etiam primi hominis
salutem. Atque hoc nuper apud illos excogitatum est, Tatiano quodam omnium
primo hujus impietatis auctore: qui Justini auditor, quamdiu cum illo
versatus est, nihil ejusmodi protulit. Post martyrium autem illius, ab
Ecclesia se abrumpens, doctoris arrogantia elatus ac tumidus, tanquam
præstantior cæteris, novam quandam formam doctrinæ conflavit: Æonas
invisibiles commentus perinde ac Valentinus: asserens quoque cum Saturnino
& Marcione, matrimonium nihil aliud esse quam corruptionem ac stuprum: nova
præterea argumenta ad subvertendam Adami salutem excogitans. Hæc Irenæus de
Hæresi quæ tunc viguit Encratitarum._ Thus far _Eusebius_. But altho the
followers of _Tatian_ were at first condemned as hereticks by the name of
_Encratites_, or _Continentes_; their principles could not be yet quite
exploded: for _Montanus_ refined upon them, and made only second marriages
unlawful; he also introduced frequent fastings, and annual, fasting days,
the keeping of _Lent_, and feeding upon dried meats. The _Apostolici_,
about the middle of the third century, condemned marriage, and were a
branch of the disciples of _Tatian_. The _Hierocitæ_ in _Egypt_, in the
latter end of the third century, also condemned marriage. _Paul_ the
_Eremite_ fled into the wilderness from the persecution of _Decius_, and
lived there a solitary life till the reign of _Constantine_ the great, but
made no disciples. _Antony_ did the like in the persecution of
_Dioclesian_, or a little before, and made disciples; and many others soon
followed his example.

Hitherto the principles of the _Encratites_ had been rejected by the
Churches; but now being refined by the Monks, and imposed not upon all men,
but only upon those who would voluntarily undertake a monastic life, they
began to be admired, and to overflow first the _Greek_ Church, and then the
_Latin_ also, like a torrent. _Eusebius_ tells us, [2] that _Constantine_
the great had those men in the highest veneration, who dedicated themselves
wholly to the divine philosophy; and that he almost venerated the most holy
company of Virgins perpetually devoted to God; being certain that the God
to whom he had consecrated himself did dwell in their minds. In his time
and that of his sons, this profession of a single life was propagated in
_Egypt_ by _Antony_, and in _Syria_ by _Hilarion_; and spred so fast, that
soon after the time of _Julian_ the Apostate a third part of the
_Egyptians_ were got into the desarts of _Egypt_. They lived first singly
in cells, then associated into _coenobia_ or convents; and at length came
into towns, and filled the Churches with Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons.
_Athanasius_ in his younger days poured water upon the hands of his master
_Antony_; and finding the Monks faithful to him, made many of them Bishops
and Presbyters in _Egypt_: and these Bishops erected new Monasteries, out
of which they chose Presbyters of their own cities, and sent Bishops to
others. The like was done in _Syria_, the superstition being quickly
propagated thither out of _Egypt_ by _Hilarion_ a disciple of _Antony_.
_Spiridion_ and _Epiphanius_ of _Cyprus_, _James_ of _Nisibis_, _Cyril_ of
_Jerusalem_, _Eustathius_ of _Sebastia_ in _Armenia_, _Eusebius_ of
_Emisa_, _Titus_ of _Bostra_, _Basilius_ of _Ancyra_, _Acacius_ of
_Cæsarea_ in _Palestine_, _Elpidius_ of _Laodicea_, _Melitius_ and
_Flavian_ of _Antioch_, _Theodorus_ of _Tyre_, _Protogenes_ of _Carrhæ_,
_Acacius_ of _Berrhæa_, _Theodotus_ of _Hierapolis_, _Eusebius_ of
_Chalcedon_, _Amphilochius_ of _Iconium_, _Gregory Nazianzen_, _Gregory
Nyssen_, and _John Chrysostom_ of _Constantinople_, were both Bishops and
Monks in the fourth century. _Eustathius_, _Gregory Nazianzen_, _Gregory
Nyssen_, _Basil_, &c. had Monasteries of Clergymen in their cities, out of
which Bishops were sent to other cities; who in like manner erected
Monasteries there, till the Churches were supplied with Bishops out of
these Monasteries. Hence _Jerome_, in a Letter written about the year 385,
[3] saith of the Clergy: _Quasi & ipsi aliud sint quam Monachi, & non
quicquid in Monachos dicitur redundet in Clericos qui patres sunt
Monachorum. Detrimentum pecoris pastoris ignominia est_. And in his book
against _Vigilantius_: _Quid facient Orientis Ecclesiæ? Quæ aut Virgines
Clericos accipiunt, aut Continentes, aut si uxores habuerint mariti esse
desistunt_. Not long after even the Emperors commanded the Churches to
chuse Clergymen out of the Monasteries by this Law.

_Impp. Arcad & Honor. AA. Cæsario PF. P._

[4] _Si quos forte Episcopi deesse sibi Clericos arbitrantur, ex monachorum
numero rectius ordinabunt: non obnoxios publicis privatisque rationibus cum
invidia teneant, sed habeant jam probatos. Dat. _vii._ Kal. Aug. Honorio A.
_iv._ & Eutychianio Coss._ A.C. 598. The _Greek_ Empire being now in the
hands of these _Encratites_, and having them in great admiration, _Daniel_
makes it a characteristick of the King who doth according to his will, that
_he should not regard the desire of Women._

Thus the Sect of the _Encratites_, set on foot by the _Gnosticks_, and
propagated by _Tatian_ and _Montanus_ near the end of the second century;
which was condemned by the Churches of that and the third century, and
refined upon by their followers; overspread the _Eastern_ Churches in the
fourth century, and before the end of it began to overspread the _Western_.
Henceforward the Christian Churches having a form of godliness, but denying
the power thereof, came into the hands of the _Encratites_: and the
Heathens, who in the fourth century came over in great numbers to the
Christians, embraced more readily this sort of Christianity, as having a
greater affinity with their old superstitions, than that of the sincere
Christians; who by the lamps of the seven Churches of _Asia_, and not by
the lamps of the Monasteries, had illuminated the Church Catholic during
the three first centuries.

The _Cataphrygians_ brought in also several other superstitions: such as
were the doctrine of Ghosts, and of their punishment in Purgatory, with
prayers and oblations for mitigating that punishment, as _Tertullian_
teaches in his books _De Anima_ and _De Monogamia_. They used also the sign
of the cross as a charm. So _Tertullian_ in his book _de Corona militis_:
_Ad omnem progressum atque promotum, ad omnem aditum & exitum, ad vestitum,
ad calceatum, ad lavacra, ad mensas, ad lamina, ad cubilia, ad sedilia,
quacunque nos conversatio exercet, frontem crucis signaculo terimus_. All
these superstitions the Apostle refers to, where he saith: _Now the Spirit
speaketh expresly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the
faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils_, the
_Dæmons_ and Ghosts worshipped by the heathens, _speaking lyes in
hypocrisy_, about their apparitions, the miracles done by them, their
reliques, and the sign of the cross, _having consciences seared with a hot
iron_; _forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats_, &c. 1
Tim. iv. 1,2,3. From the _Cataphrygians_ these principles and practices
were propagated down to posterity. _For the mystery of iniquity_ did
_already work_ in the _Apostles_ days in the _Gnosticks_, continued to work
very strongly in their offspring the _Tatianists_ and _Cataphrygians_, and
was to work _till that man of sin_ should _be revealed_; _whose coming is
after the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders,
and all deceivableness of unrighteousness_; coloured over with a form of
_Christian_ godliness, but without the power thereof, 2 _Thess_. ii. 7-10.

For tho some stop was put to the _Cataphrygian_ Christianity, by Provincial
Councils, till the fourth century; yet the _Roman_ Emperors then turning
_Christians_, and great multitudes of heathens coming over in outward
profession, these found the _Cataphrygian_ Christianity more suitable to
their old principles, of placing religion in outward forms and ceremonies,
holy-days, and doctrines of Ghosts, than the religion of the sincere
_Christians_: wherefore they readily sided with the _Cataphrygian
Christians_, and established that Christianity before the end of the fourth
century. By this means those of understanding, after they had been
persecuted by the heathen Emperors in the three first centuries, and _were
holpen with a little help_, by the conversion of _Constantine_ the great
and his sons to the _Christian_ religion, fell under new persecutions, _to
purge them_ from the dissemblers, _and to make them white, even to the time
of the end_.

Notes to Chap. XIII.

[1] Lib. 4. c. 28, 29.

[2] In vita Constantini, l. 4. c. 28.

[3] Epist. 10.

[4] L. 32. de Episcopis.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. XIV.

_Of the _Mahuzzims_, honoured by the King who doth according to his will_.

In scripture we are told of some _trusting in God_ and others _trusting in
idols_, and that _God is our refuge, our strength, our defense_. In this
sense God is _the rock of his people_, and false Gods are called _the rock
of those that trust in them_, Deut. xxxii. 4, 15, 18, 30, 31, 37. In the
same sense the Gods of _the King_ who _shall do according to his will_ are
called _Mahuzzims_, munitions, fortresses, protectors, guardians, or
defenders. _In his estate_, saith [1] _Daniel_, _shall he honour
_Mahuzzims_; even with a God whom his fathers knew not, shall he honour
them with gold and silver, and with precious stones, and things of value.
Thus shall he do in the most strong holds_ or temples;--_and he shall cause
them to rule over many, and divide the land_ among them _for a possession_.
Now this came to pass by degrees in the following manner.

_Gregory Nyssen_ [2] tells us, that after the persecution of the Emperor
_Decius_, _Gregory_ Bishop of _Neocæsarea_ in _Pontus_, _instituted among
all people, as an addition or corollary of devotion towards God, that
festival days and assemblies should be celebrated to them who had contended
for the faith_, that is, to the _Martyrs_. And he adds this reason for the
institution: _When he observed_, saith _Nyssen_, _that the simple and
unskilful multitude, by reason of corporeal delights, remained in the error
of idols; that the principal thing might be corrected among them, namely,
that instead of their vain worship they might turn their eyes upon God; he
permitted that at the memories of the holy Martyrs they might make merry
and delight themselves, and be dissolved into joy_. The heathens were
delighted with the festivals of their Gods, and unwilling to part with
those delights; and therefore _Gregory_, to facilitate their conversion,
instituted annual festivals to the _Saints_ and _Martyrs_. Hence it came to
pass, that for exploding the festivals of the heathens, the principal
festivals of the _Christians_ succeeded in their room: as the keeping of
_Christmas_ with ivy and feasting, and playing and sports, in the room of
the _Bacchanalia_ and _Saturnalia_; the celebrating of _May-day_ with
flowers, in the room of the _Floralia_; and the keeping of festivals to the
Virgin _Mary_, _John_ the Baptist, and divers of the Apostles, in the room
of the solemnities at the entrance of the Sun into the signs of the
_Zodiac_ in the old _Julian_ Calendar. In the same persecution of _Decius_,
_Cyprian_ ordered the passions of the Martyrs in _Africa_ to be registred,
in order to celebrate their memories annually with oblations and
sacrifices: and _Felix_ Bishop of _Rome_, a little after, as _Platina_
relates, _Martyrum gloria consulens, constituit at quotannis sacrificia
eorum nomine celebrarentur_; "consulting the glory of the Martyrs, ordained
that sacrifices should be celebrated annually in their name." By the
pleasures of these festivals the _Christians_ increased much in number, and
decreased as much in virtue, until they were _purged and made white_ by the
persecution of _Dioclesian_. This was the first step made in the
_Christian_ religion towards the veneration of the Martyrs: and tho it did
not yet amount to an unlawful worship; yet it disposed the _Christians_
towards such a further veneration of the dead, as in a short time ended in
the invocation of Saints.

The next step was the affecting to pray at the sepulchres of the Martyrs:
which practice began in _Dioclesian_'s persecution. The Council of
_Eliberis_ in _Spain_, celebrated in the third or fourth year of
_Dioclesian_'s persecution, A.C. 305, hath these Canons. Can. 34. _Cereos
per diem placuit in Coemeterio non incendi: inquietandi enim spiritus
sanctorum non sunt. Qui hæc non observârint, arceantur ab Ecclesiæ
communione._ Can. 35. _Placuit prohiberi ne fæminæ in Coemeterio
pervigilent, eò quod sæpe sub obtentu orationis latentèr scelera
committant._ Presently after that persecution, suppose about the year 314,
the Council of _Laodicea_ in _Phrygia_, which then met for restoring the
lapsed discipline of the Church, has the following Canons. Can. 9. _Those
of the Church are not allowed to go into the _Coemeteries_ or _Martyries_,
as they are called, of hereticks, for the sake of prayer or recovery of
health: but such as go, if they be of the faithful, shall be excommunicated
for a time_. Can. 34. _A _Christian_ must not leave the Martyrs of
_Christ_, and go to false Martyrs_, that is, to the Martyrs of the
hereticks; _for these are alien from God: and therefore let those be
anathema who go to them_. Can. 51. _The birth-days of the Martyrs shall not
be celebrated in _Lent_, but their commemoration shall be made on the
Sabbath-days and Lords days_. The Council of _Paphlagonia_, celebrated in
the year 324, made this Canon: _If any man being arrogant, abominates the
congregations of the Martyrs, or the Liturgies performed therein, or the
memories of the Martyrs, let him be anathema_. By all which it is manifest
that the _Christians_ in the time of _Dioclesian_'s persecution used to
pray in the _Coemeteries_ or burying-places of the dead; for avoiding the
danger of the persecution, and for want of Churches, which were all thrown
down: and after the persecution was over, continued that practice in honour
of the Martyrs, till new Churches could be built: and by use affected it as
advantageous to devotion, and for recovering the health of those that were
sick. It also appears that in these burying-places they commemorated the
Martyrs yearly upon days dedicated to them, and accounted all these
practices pious and religious, and anathematized those men as arrogant who
opposed them, or prayed in the _Martyries_ of the hereticks. They also
lighted torches to the Martyrs in the day-time, as the heathens did to
their Gods; which custom, before the end of the fourth century, prevailed
much in the _West_. They sprinkled the worshipers of the Martyrs with
holy-water, as the heathens did the worshipers of their Gods; and went in
pilgrimage to see _Jerusalem_ and other holy places, as if those places
conferred sanctity on the visiters. From the custom of praying in the
_Coemeteries_ and _Martyries_, came the custom of translating the bodies of
the Saints and Martyrs into such Churches as were new built: the Emperor
_Constantius_ began this practice about the year 359, causing the bodies of
_Andrew_ the Apostle, _Luke_ and _Timothy_, to be translated into a new
Church at _Constantinople_: and before this act of _Constantius_, the
_Egyptians_ kept the bodies of their Martyrs and Saints unburied upon beds
in their private houses, and told stories of their souls appearing after
death and ascending up to heaven, as _Athanasius_ relates in the life of
_Antony_. All which gave occasion to the Emperor _Julian_, as _Cyril_
relates, to accuse the _Christians_ in this manner: _Your adding to that
antient dead man, Jesus, many new dead men, who can sufficiently abominate?
You have filled all places with sepulchres and monuments, altho you are no
where bidden to prostrate yourselves to sepulchres, and to respect them
officiously._ And a little after: _Since _Jesus_ said that sepulchres are
full of filthiness, how do you invoke God upon them_? and in another place
he saith, that if _Christians_ had adhered to the precepts of the
_Hebrews_, _they would have worshiped one God instead of many, and not a
man, or rather not many unhappy men_: And that they _adored the wood of the
cross, making its images on their foreheads, and before their houses_.

After the sepulchres of Saints and Martyrs were thus converted into places
of worship like the heathen temples, and the Churches into sepulchres, and
a certain sort of sanctity attributed to the dead bodies of the Saints and
Martyrs buried in them, and annual festivals were kept to them, with
sacrifices offered to God in their name; the next step towards the
invocation of Saints, was the attributing to their dead bodies, bones and
other reliques, a power of working miracles, by means of the separate
souls, who were supposed to know what we do or say, and to be able to do us
good or hurt, and to work those miracles. This was the very notion the
heathens had of the separate souls of their antient Kings and Heroes, whom
they worshiped under the names of _Saturn_, _Rhea_, _Jupiter_, _Juno_,
_Mars_, _Venus_, _Bacchus_, _Ceres_, _Osiris_, _Isis_, _Apollo_, _Diana_,
and the rest of their Gods. For these Gods being male and female, husband
and wife, son and daughter, brother and sister, are thereby discovered to
be antient men and women. Now as the first step towards the invocation of
Saints was set on foot by the persecution of _Decius_, and the second by
the persecution of _Dioclesian_; so this third seems to have been owing to
the proceedings of _Constantius_ and _Julian_ the Apostate. When _Julian_
began to restore the worship of the heathen Gods, and to vilify the Saints
and Martyrs; the _Christians_ of _Syria_ and _Egypt_ seem to have made a
great noise about the miracles done by the reliques of the _Christian_
Saints and Martyrs, in opposition to the powers attributed by _Julian_ and
the heathens to their Idols. For _Sozomen_ and _Ruffinus_ tell us, that
when he opened the heathen Temples, and consulted the Oracle of _Apollo
Daphnæus_ in the suburbs of _Antioch_, and pressed by many sacrifices for
an answer; the Oracle at length told him that the bones of the Martyr
_Babylas_ which were buried there hinder'd him from speaking. By which
answer we may understand, that some _Christian_ was got into the place
where the heathen Priests used to speak thro' a pipe in delivering their
Oracles: and before this, _Hilary_ in his book against _Constantius_,
written in the last year of that Emperor, makes the following mention of
what was then doing in the _East_ where he was. _Sine martyrio persequeris.
Plus crudelitati vestræ _Nero_, _Deci_, _Maximiane_, debemus. Diabolum enim
per vos vicimus. Sanctus ubique beatorum martyrum sanguis exceptus est, dum
in his Dæmones mugiunt, dum ægritudines depelluntur, dum miraculorum opera
cernuntur, elevari sine laqueis corpora, & dispensis pede fæminis vestes
non defluere in faciem, uri sine ignibus spiritus, confiteri sine
interrogantis incremento fidei_. And _Gregory Nazianzen_, in his first
Oration against the Emperor _Julian_ then reigning, writes thus: _Martyres
non extimuisti quibus præclari honores & festa constituta, à quibus Dæmones
propelluntur & morbi curantur; quorum sunt apparitiones & prædictiones;
quorum vel sola corpora idem possunt quod animæ sanctæ, sive manibus
contrectentur, sive honorentur: quorum vel solæ sanguinis guttæ atque
exigua passionis signa idem possunt quod corpora. Hæc non colis sed
contemnis & aspernaris_. These things made the heathens in the reign of the
same Emperor demolish the sepulchre of _John_ the Baptist in _Phoenicia_,
and burn his bones; when several _Christians_ mixing themselves with the
heathens, gathered up some of his remains, which were sent to _Athanasius_,
who hid them in the wall of a Church; foreseeing by a prophetic spirit, as
_Ruffinus_ tells us, that they might be profitable to future generations.

The cry of these miracles being once set on foot, continued for many years,
and encreased and grew more general. _Chrysostom_, in his second Oration on
St. _Babylas_, twenty years after the silencing of the Oracle of _Apollo
Daphnæus_ as above, viz. A.C. 382, saith of the miracles done by the Saints
and their reliques [3]: _Nulla est nostri hujus Orbis seu regio, seu gens,
seu urbs, ubi nova & inopinata miracula hæc non decantentur; quæ quidem si
figmenta fuissent, prorsus in tantam hominum admirationem non venissent_.
And a little after: _Abunde orationi nostræ fidem faciunt quæ quotidiana à
martyribus miracula eduntur, magna affatim ad illa hominum multitudine
affluente_. And in his 66th Homily, describing how the Devils were
tormented and cast out by the bones of the Martyrs, he adds: _Ob eam causam
multi plerumque Reges peregrè profecti sunt, ut hoc spectaculo fruerentur.
Siquidem sanctorum martyrum templa futuri judicii vestigia & signa
exhibent, dum nimirum Dæmones flagris cæduntur, hominesque torquentur &
liberantur. Vide quæ sanctorum vitâ functorum vis sit?_ And _Jerom_ in his
Epitaph on _Paula_, thus [4] mentions the same things. _Paula vidit
Samariam: ibi siti sunt Elisæus & Abdias prophetæ, & Joannes Baptista, ubi
multis intremuit consternata miraculis. Nam cernebat variis dæmones rugire
cruciatibus, & ante sepulchra sanctorum ululare, homines more luporum
vocibus latrare canum, fremere leonum, sibilare serpentum, mugire taurorum,
alios rotare caput & post tergum terram vertice tangere, suspensisque pede
fæminis vestes non defluere in faciem_. This was about the year 384: and
_Chrysostom_ in his Oration on the _Egyptian_ Martyrs, seems to make
_Egypt_ the ringleader in these matters, saying [5]: _Benedictus Deus
quandoquidem ex Ægypto prodeunt martyres, ex Ægypto illa cum Deo pugnante
ac insanissima, & unde impia ora, unde linguæ blasphemæ; ex Ægypto martyres
habentur; non in Ægypto tantum, nec in finitima vicinaque regione, sed
_UBIQUE TERRARUM_. Et quemadmodum in annonæ summa ubertate, cum viderunt
urbium incolæ majorem quam usus habitatorum postulat esse proventum, ad
peregrinas etiam urbes transmittunt: cum & suam comitatem & liberalitatem
ostendant, tum ut præter horum abundantiam cum facilitate res quibus
indigent rursus ab illis sibi comparent: sic & Ægyptii, quod attinet ad
religionis athletas, fecerunt. Cum apud se multam eorum Dei benignitate
copiam cernerent, nequaquam ingens Dei munus sua civitate concluserunt, sed
in _OMNES TERRÆ PARTES_ bonorum thesauros effuderunt: cum ut suum in
fratres amorem ostenderent, tum ut communem omnium dominum honore
afficerent, ac civitati suæ gloriam apud omnes compararent, totiusque
terrarum _ORBIS_ esse _METROPOLIN_ declararent.--Sanctorum enim illorum
corpora quovis adamantino & inexpugnabili muro tutiùs nobis urbem
communiunt, & tanquam excelsi quidam scopuli undique prominentes, non horum
qui sub sensus cadunt & oculis cernuntur hostium impetus propulsant tantùm,
sed etiam invisibilium dæmonum insidias, omnesque diaboli fraudes
subvertunt ac dissipant.--Neque vero tantùm adversus hominum insidias aut
adversus fallacias dæmonum utilis nobis est hæc possessio, sed si nobis
communis dominus ob peccatorum multitudinem irascatur, his objectis
corporibus continuo poterimus eum propitium reddere civitati_. This Oration
was written at _Antioch_, while _Alexandria_ was yet the Metropolis of the
_East_, that is, before the year 381, in which _Constantinople_ became the
Metropolis: and it was a work of some years for the _Egyptians_ to have
distributed the miracle-working reliques of their Martyrs over all the
world, as they had done before that year. _Egypt_ abounded most with the
reliques of Saints and Martyrs, the _Egyptians_ keeping them embalmed upon
beds even in their private houses; and _Alexandria_ was eminent above all
other cities for dispersing them, so as on that account to acquire glory
with all men, and manifest herself to be the _Metropolis_ of the world.
_Antioch_ followed the example of _Egypt_, in dispersing the reliques of
the forty Martyrs: and the examples of _Egypt_ and _Syria_ were soon
followed by the rest of the world.

The reliques of the forty Martyrs at _Antioch_ were distributed among the
Churches before the year 373; for _Athanasius_ who died in that year, wrote
an Oration upon them. This Oration is not yet published, but _Gerard
Vossius_ saw it in MS. in the Library of Cardinal _Ascanius_ in _Italy_, as
he says in his commentary upon the Oration of _Ephræm Syrus_ on the same
forty Martyrs. Now since the Monks of _Alexandria_ sent the reliques of the
Martyrs of _Egypt_ into all parts of the earth, and thereby acquired glory
to their city, and declared her in these matters the Metropolis of the
whole world, as we have observed out of _Chrysostom_; it may be concluded,
that before _Alexandria_ received the forty Martyrs from _Antioch_, she
began to send out the reliques of her own Martyrs into all parts, setting
the first example to other cities. This practice therefore began in _Egypt_
some years before the death of _Athanasius_. It began when the
miracle-working bones of _John_ the Baptist were carried into _Egypt_, and
hid in the wall of a Church, _that they might be profitable to future
generations_. It was restrained in the reign of _Julian_ the Apostate: and
then it spred from _Egypt_ into all the Empire, _Alexandria_ being the
Metropolis of the whole world, according to _Chrysostom_, for propagating
this sort of devotion, and _Antioch_ and other cities soon following her
example.

In propagating these superstitions, the ring-leaders were the Monks, and
_Antony_ was at the head of them: for in the end of the life of _Antony_,
_Athanasius_ relates that these were his dying words to his disciples who
then attended him. _Do you take care_, said _Antony_, _to adhere to
_Christ_ in the first place, and then to the Saints, that after death they
may receive you as friends and acquaintance into the everlasting
tabernacles, Think upon these things, perceive these things; and if you
have any regard to me, remember me as a father_. This being delivered in
charge to the Monks by _Antony_ at his death, A.C. 356, could not but
inflame their whole body with devotion towards the Saints, as the ready way
to be received, by them into the eternal Tabernacles after death. Hence
came that noise about the miracles, done by the reliques of the Saints in
the time of _Constantius_: hence came the dispersion of the miracle-working
reliques into all the Empire; _Alexandria_ setting the example, and being
renowned, for it above all other cities. Hence it came to pass in the days
of _Julian_, A.C. 362, that _Athanasius_ by a prophetic spirit, as
_Ruffinus_ tells us, hid the bones of _John_ the Baptist from the Heathens,
not in the ground to be forgotten, but in the hollow wall of a Church
before proper witnesses, that they might _be profitable to future
generations_. Hence also came the invocation of the Saints for doing such
miracles, and for assisting men in their devotions, and mediating with God.
For _Athanasius_, even from his youth, looked upon the dead Saints and
Martyrs as mediators of our prayers: in his Epistle to _Marcellinus_,
written in the days of _Constantine_ the great, he saith that the words of
the _Psalms_ are not to be transposed or any wise changed, but to be
recited and sung without any artifice, as they are written, _that the holy
men who delivered them, knowing them to be their own words, may pray with
us; or rather, that the Holy Ghost who spake in the holy men, seeing his
own words with which he inspired them, may join_ with them _in assisting
us_.

Whilst _Egypt_ abounded with Monks above any other country, the veneration
of the Saints began sooner, and spred faster there than in other places.
_Palladius_ going into _Egypt_ in the year 388 to visit the Monasteries,
and the sepulchres of _Apollonius_ and other Martyrs of _Thebais_ who had
suffered under _Maximinus_, saith of them: _Iis omnibus Christiani fecerunt
ædem unam, ubi nunc multæ virtutes peraguntur. Tanta autem fuit viri
gratia, ut de iis quæ esset precatus statim exaudiretur, eum sic honorante
servatore: quem etiam nos in martyrio precati vidimus, cum iis qui cum ipso
fuerunt martyrio affecti; & Deum adorantes, eorum corpora salutavimus._
_Eunapius_ also, a heathen, yet a competent witness of what was done in his
own times, relating how the soldiers delivered the temples of _Egypt_ into
the hands of the Monks, which was done in the year 389, rails thus in an
impious manner at the Martyrs, as succeeding in the room of the old Gods of
_Egypt_. _Illi ipsi, _milites_, Monachos Canobi quoque collocârunt, ut pro
Diis qui animo cernuntur, servos & quidem flagitiosos divinis honoribus
percolerent, hominum mentibus ad cultum ceremoniasque obligatis. Ii namque
condita & salita eorum capita, qui ob scelerum multitudinem à judicibus
extremo judicio fuerant affecti, pro Divis ostentabant; iis genua
submittebant, eos in Deorum numerum receptabant, ad illorum sepulchra
pulvere sordibusque conspurcati. Martyres igitur vocabantur, & ministri
quidem & legati arbitrique precum apud Deos; cum fuerint servilia infida &
flagris pessimè subacta, quæ cicatrices scelerum ac nequitiæ vestigia
corporibus circumferunt; ejusmodi tamen Deos fert tellus_. By these
instances we may understand the invocation of Saints was now of some
standing in _Egypt_, and that it was already generally received and
practised there by the common people.

Thus _Basil_ a Monk, who was made Bishop of _Cæsarea_ in the year 369, and
died in the year 378, in his Oration on the Martyr _Mamas_, saith: _Be ye
mindful of the Martyr; as many of you as have enjoyed him in your dreams,
as many as in this place have been assisted by him in prayer, as many of
you as upon invoking him by name have had him present in your works, as
many as he has reduced into the way from wandering, as many as he has
restored to health, as, many as have had their dead children restored by
him to life, as many as have had their lives prolonged by him_: and a
little after, he thus expresses the universality of this superstition in
the regions of _Cappadocia_ and _Bithynia_: _At the memory of the Martyr_,
saith he, _the whole region is moved; at his festival the whole city is
transported with joy. Nor do the kindred of the rich turn aside to the
sepulchres of their ancestors, but all go to the place of devotion._ Again,
in the end of the Homily he prays, that _God would preserve the Church,
thus fortified with the great towers of the Martyrs_: and in his Oration on
the forty Martyrs; _These are they_, saith he, _who obtaining our country,
like certain towers afford us safety against our enemies. Neither are they
shut up in one place only, but being distributed are sent into many
regions, and adorn many countries.--You have often endeavoured, you have
often laboured to find one who might pray for you: here are forty, emitting
one voice of prayer.--He that is in affliction flies to these, he that
rejoices has recourse to these: the first, that he may be freed from evil,
the last that he may continue in happiness. Here a woman praying for her
children is heard; she obtains a safe return for her husband from abroad,
and health for him in his sickness.--O ye common keepers of mankind, the
best companions of our cares, suffragans and coadjutors of our prayers,
most powerful embassadors to God_, &c. By all which it is manifest, that
before the year 378, the Orations and Sermons upon the Saints went much
beyond the bounds of mere oratorical flourishes, and that the common people
in the _East_ were already generally corrupted by the Monks with
Saint-worship.

_Gregory Nazianzen_ a Monk, in his sixth Oration written A.C. 373, when he
was newly made Bishop of _Sasima_, saith: _Let us purify ourselves to the
Martyrs, or rather to the God of the Martyrs_: and a little after he calls
the Martyrs _mediators of obtaining an ascension or divinity_. The same
year, in the end of his Oration upon _Athanasius_ then newly dead, he thus
invokes him: _Do thou look down upon us propitiously, and govern this
people, as perfect adorers of the perfect Trinity, which in the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, is contemplated and worshiped: if there shall be
peace, preserve me, and feed my flock with me; but if war, bring me home,
place me by thyself, and by those that are like thee; however great my
request._ And in the end of the funeral Oration upon _Basil_, written A.C.
378, he thus addresses him: _But thou, O divine and sacred Head, look down
upon us from heaven; and by thy prayers either take away that thorn of the
flesh which is given us by God for exercise, or obtain that we may bear it
with courage, and direct all our life to that which is most fitting for us.
When we depart this life, receive us there in your Tabernacles, that living
together and beholding the holy and blessed Trinity more purely and
perfectly, whereof we have now but an imperfect view, we may there come to
the end of our desires, and receive this reward of the wars which we have
waged or suffered_: and in his Oration upon _Cyprian_, not the Bishop of
_Carthage_, but a _Greek_, he invokes him after the same manner; and tells
us also how a pious Virgin named _Justina_, was protected by invoking the
Virgin _Mary_, and how miracles were done by the ashes of _Cyprian_.

_Gregory Nyssen_, another eminent Monk and Bishop, in the life of _Ephræm
Syrus_, tells how a certain man returning from a far country, was in great
danger, by reason all the ways were intercepted by the armies of barbarous
nations; but upon invoking _Ephræm_ by name, and saying, _Holy _Ephræm_
assist me_, he escaped the danger, neglected the fear of death, and beyond
his hope got safe home. In the end of this Oration _Gregory_ calls upon
_Ephræm_ after the following manner: _But thou, O Ephræm, assisting now at
the divine altar, and sacrificing to the Prince of life, and to the most
holy Trinity, together with the Angels; remember us all, and obtain for us
pardon of our sins, that we may enjoy the eternal happiness of the kingdom
of heaven._ The same _Gregory_, in his Oration on the Martyr _Theodorus_
written A.C. 381, thus describes the power of that Martyr, and the practice
of the people. _This Martyr_, saith he, _the last year quieted the
barbarous tempest, and put a stop to the horrid war of the fierce and cruel
_Scythians_.--If any one is permitted to carry away the dust with which the
tomb is covered, wherein the body of the Martyr rests; the dust is accepted
as a gift, and gathered to be laid up as a thing of great price. For to
touch the reliques themselves, if any such prosperous fortune shall at any
time happen; how great a favour that is, and not to be obtained without the
most earnest prayers, they know well who have obtained it. For as a living
and florid body, they who behold it embrace it, applying to it the eyes,
mouth, ears, and all the organs of sense; and then with affection pouring
tears upon the Martyr, as if he was whole and appeared to them: they offer
prayers with supplication, that he would intercede for them as an advocate,
praying to him as an Officer attending upon God, and invoking him as
receiving gifts whenever he will._ At length _Gregory_ concludes the
Oration with this prayer: _O Theodorus, we want many blessings; intercede
and beseech for thy country before the common King and Lord: for the
country of the Martyr is the place of his passion, and they are his
citizens, brethren and kindred, who have him, defend, adorn and honour him.
We fear afflictions, we expect dangers: the wicked _Scythians_ are not far
off, ready to make war against us. As a soldier fight for us, as a Martyr
use liberty of speech for thy fellow-servants. Pray for peace, that these
publick meetings may not cease, that the furious and wicked barbarian may
not rage against the temples and altars, that the profane and impious may
not trample upon the holy things. We acknowledge it a benefit received from
thee, that we are preserved safe and entire, we pray for freedom from
danger in time to come: and if there shall be need of greater intercession
and deprecation, call together the choir of thy brethren the Martyrs, and
in conjunction with them all intercede for us. Let the prayers of many just
ones attone for the sins of the multitudes and the people; exhort _Peter_,
excite _Paul_, and also _John_ the divine and beloved disciple, that they
may be sollicitous for the Churches which they have erected, for which they
have been in chains, for which they have undergone dangers and deaths; that
the worship of idols may not lift up its head against us, that heresies may
not spring up like thorns in the vineyard, that tares grown up may not
choak the wheat, that no rock void of the fatness of true dew may be
against us, and render the fruitful power of the word void of a root; but
by the power of the prayers of thyself and thy companions, O admirable man
and eminent among the Martyrs, the commonwealth of _Christians_ may become
a field of corn_. The same _Gregory Nyssen_, in his sermon upon the death
of _Meletius_ Bishop of _Antioch_, preached at _Constantinople_ the same
year, A.C. 381, before the Bishops of all the _East_ assembled in the
second general Council, spake thus of _Meletius_. _The Bridegroom_, saith
he, _is not taken from us: he stands in the midst of us, tho we do not see
him: he is a Priest in the most inward places, and face to face intercedes
before God for us and the sins of the people_. This was no oratorical
flourish, but _Gregory_'s real opinion, as may be understood by what we
have cited out of him concerning _Ephræm_ and _Theodorus_: and as _Gregory_
preached this before the Council of _Constantinople_, you may thence know,
saith [6] _Baronius_, that he professed what the whole Council, and
therewith the whole Church of those parts believed, namely, that the Saints
in heaven offer prayers for us before God.

_Ephræm Syrus_, another eminent Monk, who was contemporary with _Basil_,
and died the same year; in the end of his Encomium or Oration upon _Basil_
then newly dead, invokes him after this manner: _Intercede for me, a very
miserable man; and recal me by thy intercessions, O father; thou who art
strong, pray for me who am weak; thou who art diligent, for me who am
negligent; thou who art chearful, for me who am heavy; thou who art wise,
for me who am foolish. Thou who hast treasured up a treasure of all
virtues, be a guide to me who am empty of every good work_. In the
beginning of his Encomium upon the forty Martyrs, written at the same time,
he thus invokes them: _Help me therefore, O ye Saints, with your
intercession; and O ye beloved, with your holy prayers, that _Christ_ by
his grace may direct my tongue to speak_, &c. and afterwards mentioning the
mother of one of these forty Martyrs, he concludes the Oration with this
prayer: _I entreat thee, O holy, faithful, and blessed woman, pray for me
to the Saints, saying; Intercede ye that triumph in _Christ_, for the most
little and miserable _Ephræm_, that he may find mercy, and by the grace of
_Christ_ may be saved_. Again, in his second Sermon or Oration on the
praises of the holy Martyrs of _Christ_, he thus addresses them: _We
entreat you most holy Martyrs, to intercede with the Lord for us miserable
sinners, beset with the filthiness of negligence, that he would infuse his
divine grace into us_: and afterwards, near the end of the same discourse;
_Now ye most holy men and glorious Martyrs of God, help me a miserable
sinner with your prayers, that in that dreadful hour I may obtain mercy,
when the secrets of all hearts shall be made manifest. I am to day become
to you, most holy Martyrs of _Christ_, as it were an unprofitable and
unskilful cup-bearer: for I have delivered to the sons and brothers of your
faith, a cup of the excellent wine of your warfare, with the excellent
table of your victory, replenished with all sorts of dainties. I have
endeavoured, with the whole affection and desire of my mind, to recreate
your fathers and brothers, kindred and relations, who daily frequent the
table. For behold they sing, and with exultation and jubilee glorify God,
who has crown'd your virtues, by setting on your most sacred heads
incorruptible and celestial crowns; they with excessive joy stand about the
sacred reliques of your martyrdoms, wishing for a blessing, and desiring to
bear away holy medicines both for the body and the mind. As good disciples
and faithful ministers of our benign Lord and Saviour, bestow therefore a
blessing on them all: and on me also, tho weak and feeble, who having
received strength by your merits and intercessions, have with the whole
devotion of my mind, sung a hymn to your praise and glory before your holy
reliques. Wherefore I beseech you stand before the throne of the divine
Majesty for me _Ephræm_, a vile and miserable sinner, that by your prayers
I may deserve to obtain salvation, and with you enjoy eternal felicity by
the grace and benignity and mercy of our Lord and Saviour _Jesus Christ_,
to whom with the Father and Holy Ghost be praise, honour and glory for ever
and ever_. Amen.

By what has been cited out of _Basil_, the two _Gregories_ and _Ephræm_, we
may understand that Saint-worship was established among the Monks and their
admirers in _Egypt_, _Phoenicia_, _Syria_ and _Cappadocia_, before the year
378, this being the year in which _Basil_ and _Ephræm_ died. _Chrysostom_
was not much later; he preached at _Antioch_ almost all the time of
_Theodosius_ the great, and in his Sermons are many exhortations to this
sort of superstition, as may be seen in the end of his Orations on S.
_Julia_, on St. _Pelagia_, on the Martyr _Ignatius_, on the _Egyptian_
Martyrs, on Fate and Providence, on the Martyrs in general, on St.
_Berenice_ and St. _Prosdoce_, on _Juventinus_ and _Maximus_, on the name
of _Coemetery_, &c. Thus in his Sermon on _Berenice_ and _Prosdoce_:
_Perhaps_, saith he, _you are inflamed with no small love towards these
Martyrs; therefore with this ardour let us fall down before their reliques,
let us embrace their coffins. For the coffins of the Martyrs have great
virtue, even as the bones of the Martyrs have great power. Nor let us only
on the day of this festival, but also on other days apply to them, invoke
them, and beseech them to be our patrons: for they have great power and
efficacy, not only whilst alive, but also after death; and much more after
death than before. For now they bear the marks or brands of _Christ_; and
when they shew these marks, they can obtain all things of the King. Seeing
therefore they abound with such efficacy, and have so much friendship with
him; we also, when by continual attendance and perpetual visitation of them
we have insinuated ourselves into their familiarity, may by their
assistance obtain the mercy of God_.

_Constantinople_ was free from these superstitions till _Gregory Nazianzen_
came thither A.D. 379; but in a few years it was also inflamed with it.
_Ruffinus_ [7] tells us, that when the Emperor _Theodosius_ was setting out
against the tyrant _Eugenius_, which was in the year 394, he went about
with the Priests and people to all the places of prayer; lay prostrate in
haircloth before the shrines of the Martyrs and Apostles, and pray'd for
assistance by the intercession of the Saints. _Sozomen_ [8] adds, that when
the Emperor was marched seven miles from _Constantinople_ against
_Eugenius_, he went into a Church which he had built to _John_ the Baptist,
_and invoked the Baptist for his assistance. Chrysostom_ [9] says: _He that
is clothed in purple, approaches to embrace these sepulchres; and laying
aside his dignity, stands supplicating the Saints to intercede for him with
God: and he who goes crowned with a diadem, offers his prayers to the
tent-maker and the fisher-man as his Protestors._ And in [10] another
place: _The cities run together to the sepulchres of the Martyrs, and the
people are inflamed with the love of them_.

This practice of sending reliques from place to place for working miracles,
and thereby inflaming the devotion of the nations towards the dead Saints
and their reliques, and setting up the religion of invoking their souls,
lasted only till the middle of the reign of the Emperor _Theodosius_ the
great; for he then prohibited it by the following Edict. _Humatum corpus,
nemo ad alterum locum transferat; nemo Martyrem distrahat, nemo mercetur:
Habeant verò in potestate, si quolibet in loco sanctorum est aliquis
conditus, pro ejus veneratione, quod _Martyrium_ vocandum sit, addant quod
voluerint fabricarum. Dat. _iv._ Kal. Mart. Constantinopoli, Honorio nob.
puero & Euodio Coss._ A.C. 386. After this they filled the fields and
high-ways with altars erected to Martyrs, which they pretended to discover
by dreams and revelations: and this occasioned the making the fourteenth
Canon of the fifth Council of _Carthage_, A.C. 398. _Item placuit, ut
altaria, quæ passim per agros aut vias, tanquam memoriæ Martyrum
constituuntur, in quibus nullum corpus aut reliquiæ Martyrum conditæ
probantur, ab Episcopis, qui illis locis præsunt, si fieri potest,
evertantur. Si autem hoc propter tumultus populares non sinitur, plebes
tamen admoneantur, ne illa loca frequentent, ut qui rectè sapiunt, nullâ
ibi superstitione devincti teneantur. Et omnino nulla memoria Martyrum
probabiliter acceptetur, nisi aut ibi corpus aut aliquæ certæ reliquiæ
sint, aut ubi origo alicujus habitationis, vel possessionis, vel passionis
fidelissima origine traditur. Nam quæ per somnia, & per inanes quasi
revelationes quorumlibet hominum ubique constituuntur altaria, omnimodè
reprobentur._ These altars were for invoking the Saints or Martyrs buried
or pretended to be buried under them. First they filled the Churches in all
places with the reliques or pretended reliques of the Martyrs, for invoking
them in the Churches; and then they filled the fields and high-ways with
altars, for invoking them every where: and this new religion was set up by
the Monks in all the _Greek_ Empire before the expedition of the Emperor
_Theodosius_ against _Eugenius_, and I think before his above-mentioned
Edict, A.C. 386.

The same religion of worshiping _Mahuzzims_ quickly spred into the _Western
Empire_ also: but _Daniel_ in this Prophecy describes chiefly the things
done among the nations comprehended in the body of his third Beast.

Notes to Chap. XIV.

[1] Chap. xi. 38, 39

[2] Orat. de vita Greg. Thaumaturg. T. 3. p. 574.

[3] Vide Hom. 47. in. S. Julian.

[4] Epist. 27. ad Eustochium.

[5] Edit. Frontonis Ducæi, Tom. 1.

[6] Ad. an. 381, Sect. 41.

[7] Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 23.

[8] L. 4. c. 24.

[9] Hom. 66. ad. populum, circa finem. & Hom. 8, 27. in Matth. Hom. 42, 43.
in Gen. Hom. 1. in 1 Thess.

[10] Exposit. in Psal. 114. sub finem.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The end of the first Part._

       *       *       *       *       *

PART II.

       *       *       *       *       *

OBSERVATIONS
UPON THE
APOCALYPSE
OF
St. _JOHN_.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. I.

_Introduction, concerning the time when the _Apocalypse_ was written_.

_Irenæus_ introduced an opinion that the _Apocalypse_ was written in the
time of _Domitian_; but then he also postponed the writing of some others
of the sacred books, and was to place the _Apocalypse_ after them: he might
perhaps have heard from his master _Polycarp_ that he had received this
book from _John_ about the time of _Domitian_'s death; or indeed _John_
might himself at that time have made a new publication of it, from whence
_Irenæus_ might imagine it was then but newly written. _Eusebius_ in his
_Chronicle_ and _Ecclesiastical History_ follows _Irenoeus_; but afterwards
[1] in his _Evangelical Demonstrations_, he conjoins the banishment of
_John_ into _Patmos_, with the deaths of _Peter_ and _Paul_: and so do [2]
_Tertullian_ and _Pseudo-Prochorus_, as well as the first author, whoever
he was, of that very antient fable, that _John_ was put by _Nero_ into a
vessel of hot oil, and coming out unhurt, was banished by him into
_Patmos._ Tho this story be no more than a fiction yet was it founded on a
tradition of the first churches, that _John_ was banished into _Patmos_ in
the days of _Nero_. _Epiphanius_ represents the _Gospel of John_ as written
in the time of _Domitian_, and the _Apocalypse_ even before that of _Nero_.
[3] _Arethas_ in the beginning of his Commentary quotes the opinion of
_Irenæus_ from _Eusebius_, but follows it not: for he afterwards affirms
the _Apocalypse_ was written before the destruction of _Jerusalem_, and
that former commentators had expounded the sixth seal of that destruction.

With the opinion of the first Commentators agrees the tradition of the
Churches of _Syria_, preserved to this day in the title of the _Syriac_
Version of the _Apocalypse_, which title is this: _The Revelation which was
made to _John_ the Evangelist by God in the Island _Patmos_, into which he
was banished by _Nero_ the _Cæsar__. The fame is confirmed by a story told
by [4] _Eusebius_ out of _Clemens Alexandrinus_, and other antient authors,
concerning a youth, whom _John_ some time after his return from _Patmos_
committed to the care of the Bishop of a certain city. The Bishop educated,
instructed, and at length baptized him; but then remitting of his care, the
young man thereupon got into ill company, and began by degrees first to
revel and grow vitious, then to abuse and spoil those he met in the night;
and at last grew so desperate, that his companions turning a band of
high-way men, made him their Captain: and, saith [5] _Chrysostom_, he
continued their Captain a long time. At length _John_ returning to that
city, and hearing what was done, rode to the thief; and, when he out of
reverence to his old master fled, _John_ rode after him, recalled him, and
restored him to the Church. This is a story of many years, and requires
that _John_ should have returned from _Patmos_ rather at the death of
_Nero_ than at that of _Domitian_; because between the death of _Domitian_
and that of _John_ there were but two years and an half; and _John_ in his
old age was [6] so infirm as to be carried to Church, dying above 90 years
old, and therefore could not be then suppos'd able to ride after the thief.

This opinion is further supported by the allusions in the _Apocalypse_ to
the Temple and Altar, and holy City, as then standing; and to the
_Gentiles_, who were soon after to tread under foot the holy City and
outward Court. 'Tis confirmed also by the style of the _Apocalypse_ itself,
which is fuller of _Hebraisms_ than his Gospel. For thence it may be
gathered, that it was written when _John_ was newly come out of _Judea_,
where he had been used to the _Syriac_ tongue; and that he did not write
his Gospel, till by long converse with the _Asiatick_ Greeks he had left
off most of the _Hebraisms_. It is confirmed also by the many false
_Apocalypses_, as those of _Peter_, _Paul_, _Thomas_, _Stephen_, _Elias_
and _Cerinthus_, written in imitation of the true one. For as the many
false Gospels, false Acts, and false Epistles were occasioned by true ones;
and the writing many false _Apocalypses_, and ascribing them to Apostles
and Prophets, argues that there was a true Apostolic one in great request
with the first _Christians_: so this true one may well be suppos'd to have
been written early, that there may be room in the Apostolic age for the
writing of so many false ones afterwards, and fathering them upon _Peter_,
_Paul_, _Thomas_ and others, who were dead before _John_. _Caius_, who was
contemporary with _Tertullian_, [7] tells us that _Cerinthus_ wrote his
Revelations as a great Apostle, and pretended the visions were shewn him by
Angels, asserting a _millennium_ of carnal pleasures at _Jerusalem_ after
the resurrection; so that his _Apocalypse_ was plainly written in imitation
of _John_'s: and yet he lived so early, that [8] he resisted the Apostles
at _Jerusalem_ in or before the first year of _Claudius_, that is, 26 years
before the death of _Nero_, and [9] died before _John_.

These reasons may suffice for determining the time; and yet there is one
more, which to considering men may seem a good reason, to others not. I'll
propound it, and leave it to every man's judgment. The _Apocalypse_ seems
to be alluded to in the Epistles of _Peter_ and that to the _Hebrews_ and
therefore to have been written before them. Such allusions in the Epistle
to the _Hebrews_, I take to be the discourses concerning the High-Priest in
the heavenly Tabernacle, who is both Priest and King, as was _Melchisedec_;
and those concerning the _word of God_, with the _sharp two-edged sword_,
the [Greek: sabbatismos], or _millennial_ rest, the _earth whose end is to
be burned_, suppose by the lake of fire, _the judgment and fiery
indignation which shall devour the adversaries_, the _heavenly City which
hath foundations whose builder and maker is God_, the _cloud of witnesses,
mount _Sion_, heavenly _Jerusalem_, general assembly, spirits of just men
made perfect_, viz. by the resurrection, and _the shaking of heaven and
earth, and removing them, that the new heaven, new earth and new kingdom
which cannot be shaken, may remain_. In the first of _Peter_ occur these:
[10] _The Revelation of Jesus Christ_, twice or thrice repeated; [11] the
_blood of _Christ_ as of a Lamb foreordained before the foundation of the
world_; [12] the _spiritual building_ in heaven, 1 Pet. ii. 5. _an
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled and that fadeth not away, reserved
in heaven for us, who are kept unto the salvation, ready to be revealed in
the last time_, 1 Pet. i. 4, 5. [13] the _royal Priesthood_, [14] the _holy
Priesthood_, [15] the _judgment beginning at the house of God_, and [16]
_the Church at _Babylon__. These are indeed obscurer allusions; but the
second Epistle, from the 19th verse of the first Chapter to the end, seems
to be a continued Commentary upon the _Apocalypse_. There, in writing to
the _Churches in _Asia__, to whom _John_ was commanded to send this
Prophecy, he tells them, they _have a more sure word of Prophecy_, to be
heeded by them, _as a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the day-star arise in their hearts_, that is, until they begin to
understand it: for _no Prophecy_, saith he, _of the scripture is of any
private interpretation; the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of
man, but holy men of God spake, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.
Daniel_ [17] himself professes that he understood not his own _Prophecies_;
and therefore the Churches were not to expect the interpretation from their
Prophet _John_, but to study the Prophecies themselves. This is the
substance of what _Peter_ says in the first chapter; and then in the second
he proceeds to describe, out of this _sure word of Prophecy_, how there
should arise in the Church _false Prophets_, or _false teachers_, expressed
collectively in the _Apocalypse_ by the name of the false Prophet; who
should _bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them_, which is the character of _Antichrist_: _And many_, saith he, _shall
follow their lusts_ [18]; they that dwell on the earth [19] shall be
deceived by the false Prophet, and be made drunk with the wine of the
Whore's fornication, _by reason of whom the way of truth shall be
blasphemed_; for [20] the Beast is full of blasphemy: _and thro'
covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandize of you_; for
these are the Merchants of the Earth, who trade with the great Whore, and
their merchandize [21] is all things of price, with the bodies and souls of
men: _whose judgment--lingreth not, and their damnation [22] slumbreth
not_, but shall surely come upon them at the last day suddenly, as the
flood upon _the old world_, and fire and brimstone upon _Sodom_ and
_Gomorrha_, when the just shall be delivered [23] like _Lot_; for _the Lord
knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the
unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished_, in the lake of fire; _but
chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness_, [24]
being made drunk with the wine of the Whore's fornication; who _despise
dominion, and are not afraid to blaspheme glories_; for the beast opened
his mouth against God [25] to blaspheme his name and his tabernacle, and
them that dwell in heaven. _These, as natural brute beasts_, the ten-horned
beast and two-horned beast, or false Prophet, _made to be taken and
destroyed_, in the lake of fire, _blaspheme the things they understand
not_:--they count it pleasure to riot in the day-time--sporting themselves
with their own deceivings, while they feast [26] with you, _having eyes
full of an [27] Adulteress_: for the kingdoms of the beast live deliciously
with the great Whore, and the nations are made drunk with the wine of her
fornication. They _are gone astray, following the way of _Balaam_, the son
of _Beor_, who loved the wages of unrighteousness_, the false Prophet [28]
who taught _Balak_ to cast a stumbling-block before the children of
_Israel_. _These are_, not fountains of living water, but _wells without
water_; not such clouds of Saints as the two witnesses ascend in, but
_clouds that are carried with a tempest_, &c. Thus does the author of this
Epistle spend all the second Chapter in describing the qualities of the
_Apocalyptic_ Beasts and false Prophet: and then in the third he goes on to
describe their destruction more fully, and the future kingdom. He saith,
that because the coming of _Christ_ should be long deferred, they should
scoff, saying, _where is the promise of his coming_? Then he describes the
sudden coming of the day of the Lord upon them, _as a thief in the night_,
which is the _Apocalyptic_ phrase; and the _millennium_, or _thousand
years_, which _are with God but as a day_; the _passing away of the old
heavens_ and earth, by a conflagration in the lake of fire, and our
_looking for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness_.

Seeing therefore _Peter_ and _John_ were Apostles of the circumcision, it
seems to me that they staid with their Churches in _Judea_ and _Syria_ till
the _Romans_ made war upon their nation, that is, till the twelfth year of
_Nero_; that they then followed the main body of their flying Churches into
_Asia_, and that _Peter_ went thence by _Corinth_ to _Rome_; that the
_Roman_ Empire looked upon those Churches as enemies, because _Jews_ by
birth; and therefore to prevent insurrections, secured their leaders, and
banished _John_ into _Patmos_. It seems also probable to me that the
_Apocalypse_ was there composed, and that soon after the Epistle to the
_Hebrews_ and those of _Peter_ were written to these Churches, with
reference to this Prophecy as what they were particularly concerned in. For
it appears by these Epistles, that they were written in times of general
affliction and tribulation under the heathens, and by consequence when the
Empire made war upon the _Jews_; for till then the heathens were at peace
with the _Christian Jews_, as well as with the rest. The Epistle to the
_Hebrews_, since it mentions _Timothy_ as related to those _Hebrews_, must
be written to them after their flight into _Asia_, where _Timothy_ was
Bishop; and by consequence after the war began, the _Hebrews_ in _Judea_
being strangers to _Timothy_. _Peter_ seems also to call _Rome_ _Babylon_,
as well with respect to the war made upon _Judea_, and the approaching
captivity, like that under old _Babylon_, as with respect to that name in
the _Apocalypse_: and in writing _to the strangers scattered thro'out
_Pontus_, _Galatia_, _Cappadocia_, _Asia_ and _Bithynia__, he seems to
intimate that they were the strangers newly scattered by the _Roman_ wars;
for those were the only strangers there belonging to his care.

This account of things agrees best with history when duly rectified. For
[29] _Justin_ and [30] _Irenæus_ say, that _Simon Magus_ came to _Rome_ in
the reign of _Claudius_, and exercised juggling tricks there.
_Pseudo-Clemens_ adds, that he endeavoured there to fly, but broke his neck
thro' the prayers of _Peter_. Whence [31] _Eusebius_, or rather his
interpolator _Jerom_, has recorded, that _Peter_ came to _Rome_ in the
second year of _Claudius_: but [32] _Cyril_ Bishop of _Jerusalem_,
_Philastrius_, _Sulpitius_, _Prosper_, _Maximus Taurinensis_, and
_Hegesippus junior_, place this victory of _Peter_ in the time of _Nero_.
Indeed the antienter tradition was, that _Peter_ came to _Rome_ in the days
of this Emperor, as may be seen in [33] _Lactantius_. _Chrysostom_ [34]
tells us, that the Apostles continued long in _Judea_, and that then being
driven out by the _Jews_ they went to the _Gentiles_. This dispersion was
in the first year of the _Jewish_ war, when the _Jews_, as _Josephus_ tells
us, began to be tumultuous and violent in all places. For all agree that
the Apostles were dispersed into several regions at once; and _Origen_ has
set down the time, [35] telling us that in the beginning of the _Judaic_
war, the Apostles and disciples of our Lord were scattered into all
nations; _Thomas_ into _Parthia_, _Andrew_ into _Scythia_, _John_ into
_Asia_, and _Peter_ first into _Asia_, where he preacht to the dispersion,
and thence into _Italy_. [36] _Dionysius Corinthius_ saith, that _Peter_
went from _Asia_ by _Corinth_ to _Rome_, and all antiquity agrees that
_Peter_ and _Paul_ were martyred there in the end of _Nero_'s reign. _Mark_
went with _Timothy_ to _Rome_, 2 _Tim._ iv. 11. _Colos._ iv. 10. _Sylvanus_
was _Paul_'s assistant; and by the companions of _Peter_, mentioned in his
first Epistle, we may know that he wrote from _Rome_; and the Antients
generally agree, that in this Epistle he understood _Rome_ by _Babylon_.
His second Epistle was writ to the same dispersed strangers with the first,
2 _Pet._ iii. 1. and therein he saith, that _Paul_ had writ of the same
things to them, and also in his other Epistles, _ver._ 15, 16. Now as there
is no Epistle of _Paul_ to these strangers besides that to the _Hebrews_,
so in this Epistle, chap. x. 11, 12. we find at large all those things
which _Peter_ had been speaking of, and here refers to; particularly the
_passing away of the old heavens and earth_, and _establishing an
inheritance immoveable_, with an exhortation to grace, because _God_, to
the wicked, _is a consuming fire_, Heb. xii. 25, 26, 28, 29.

Having determined the time of writing the _Apocalyse_, I need not say much
about the truth of it, since it was in such request with the first ages,
that many endeavoured to imitate it, by feigning _Apocalypses_ under the
Apostles names; and the Apostles themselves, as I have just now shewed,
studied it, and used its phrases; by which means the style of the Epistle
to the _Hebrews_ became more mystical than that of _Paul_'s other Epistles,
and the style of _John_'s Gospel more figurative and majestical than that
of the other Gospels. I do not apprehend that _Christ_ was called the word
of God in any book of the New Testament written before the _Apocalypse_;
and therefore am of opinion, the language was taken from this Prophecy, as
were also many other phrases in this Gospel, such as those of _Christ_'s
being _the light which enlightens the world, the lamb of God which taketh
away the sins of the world, the bridegroom, he that testifieth, he that
came down from heaven, the Son of God_, &c. _Justin Martyr_, who within
thirty years after _John_'s death became a _Christian_, writes expresly
that _a certain man among the _Christians_ whose name was _John_, one of
the twelve Apostles of _Christ_, in the Revelation which was shewed him,
prophesied that those who believed in _Christ_ should live a thousand years
at _Jerusalem__. And a few lines before he saith: _But I, and as many as
are _Christians_, in all things right in their opinions, believe both that
there shall be a resurrection of the flesh, and a thousand years life at
_Jerusalem_ built, adorned and enlarged_. Which is as much as to say, that
all true _Christians_ in that early age received this Prophecy: for in all
ages, as many as believed the thousand years, received the _Apocalypse_ as
the foundation of their opinion: and I do not know one instance to the
contrary. _Papias_ Bishop of _Hierapolis_, a man of the Apostolic age, and
one of _John_'s own disciples, did not only teach the doctrine of the
thousand years, but also [37] asserted the _Apocalypse_ as written by
divine inspiration. _Melito_, who flourished next after _Justin_, [38]
wrote a commentary upon this Prophecy; and he, being Bishop of _Sardis_ one
of the seven Churches, could neither be ignorant of their tradition about
it, nor impose upon them. _Irenæus_, who was contemporary with _Melito_,
wrote much upon it, and said, that _the number 666 was in all the antient
and approved copies; and that he had it also confirmed to him by those who
had seen _John_ face to face_, meaning no doubt his master _Polycarp_ for
one. At the same time [39] _Theophilus_ Bishop of _Antioch_ asserted it,
and so did _Tertullian_, _Clemens Alexandrinus_, and _Origen_ soon after;
and their contemporary _Hippolytus_ the Martyr, Metropolitan of the
_Arabians_, [40] wrote a commentary upon it. All these were antient men,
flourishing within a hundred and twenty years after _John_'s death, and of
greatest note in the Churches of those times. Soon after did _Victorinus
Pictaviensis_ write another commentary upon it; and he lived in the time of
_Dioclesian_. This may surely suffice to shew how the _Apocalypse_ was
received and studied in the first ages: and I do not indeed find any other
book of the New Testament so strongly attested, or commented upon so early
as this. The Prophecy said: _Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear
the words of this Prophecy, and keep the things which are written therein._
This animated the first _Christians_ to study it so much, till the
difficulty made them remit, and comment more upon the other books of the
New Testament. This was the state of the _Apocalypse_, till the thousand
years being misunderstood, brought a prejudice against it: and _Dionysius_
of _Alexandria_, noting how it abounded with barbarisms, that is with
_Hebraisms_, promoted that prejudice so far, as to cause many _Greeks_ in
the fourth century to doubt of the book. But whilst the _Latins_, and a
great part of the _Greeks_, always retained the _Apocalypse_, and the rest
doubted only out of prejudice, it makes nothing against its authority.

This Prophecy is called _the Revelation_, with respect to _the scripture of
truth_, which _Daniel_ [41] was commanded to _shut up and seal, till the
time of the end_. _Daniel_ sealed it _until the time of the end_; and until
that time comes, the Lamb is opening the seals: and afterwards the two
Witnesses prophesy out of it a long time in sack-cloth, before they ascend
up to heaven in a cloud. All which is as much as to say, that these
Prophecies of _Daniel_ and _John_ should not be understood till the time of
the end: but then some should prophesy out of them in an afflicted and
mournful state for a long time, and that but darkly, so as to convert but
few. But in the very end, the Prophecy should be so far interpreted as to
convince many. _Then_, saith _Daniel, many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall be encreased_. For the Gospel must be preached in all
nations before the great tribulation, and end of the world. The
palm-bearing multitude, which come out of this great tribulation, cannot be
innumerable out of all nations, unless they be made so by the preaching of
the Gospel before it comes. There must be a stone cut out of a mountain
without hands, before it can fall upon the toes of the Image, and become a
great mountain and fill the earth. An Angel must fly thro' the midst of
heaven with the everlasting Gospel to preach to all nations, before
_Babylon_ falls, and the Son of man reaps his harvest. The two Prophets
must ascend up to heaven in a cloud, before the kingdoms of this world
become the kingdoms of _Christ_. 'Tis therefore a part of this Prophecy,
that it should not be understood before the last age of the world; and
therefore it makes for the credit of the Prophecy, that it is not yet
understood. But if the last age, the age of opening these things, be now
approaching, as by the great successes of late Interpreters it seems to be,
we have more encouragement than ever to look into these things. If the
general preaching of the Gospel be approaching, it is to us and our
posterity that those words mainly belong: [42] _In the time of the end the
wise shall understand, but none of the wicked shall understand. [43]
Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy,
and keep those things which are written therein._

The folly of Interpreters has been, to foretel times and things by this
Prophecy, as if God designed to make them Prophets. By this rashness they
have not only exposed themselves, but brought the Prophecy also into
contempt. The design of God was much otherwise. He gave this and the
Prophecies of the Old Testament, not to gratify men's curiosities by
enabling them to foreknow things, but that after they were fulfilled they
might be interpreted by the event, and his own Providence, not the
Interpreters, be then manifested thereby to the world. For the event of
things predicted many ages before, will then be a convincing argument that
the world is governed by providence. For as the few and obscure Prophecies
concerning _Christ_'s first coming were for setting up the _Christian_
religion, which all nations have since corrupted; so the many and clear
Prophecies concerning the things to be done at _Christ_'s second coming,
are not only for predicting but also for effecting a recovery and
re-establishment of the long-lost truth, and setting up a kingdom wherein
dwells righteousness. The event will prove the _Apocalypse_; and this
Prophecy, thus proved and understood, will open the old Prophets, and all
together will make known the true religion, and establish it. For he that
will understand the old Prophets, must begin with this; but the time is not
yet come for understanding them perfectly, because the main revolution
predicted in them is not yet come to pass. _In the days of the voice of the
seventh Angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God shall be
finished, as he hath declared to his servants the Prophets_: and then _the
kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of our Lord and his
_Christ_, and he shall reign for ever_, Apoc. x. 7. xi. 15. There is
already so much of the Prophecy fulfilled, that as many as will take pains
in this study, may see sufficient instances of God's providence: but then
the signal revolutions predicted by all the holy Prophets, will at once
both turn mens eyes upon considering the predictions, and plainly interpret
them. Till then we must content ourselves with interpreting what hath been
already fulfilled.

Amongst the Interpreters of the last age there is scarce one of note who
hath not made some discovery worth knowing; and thence I seem to gather
that God is about opening these mysteries. The success of others put me
upon considering it; and if I have done any thing which may be useful to
following writers, I have my design.

Notes to Chap. I.

[1] Dem. Evang. l. 3.

[2] Vid. _Pamelium_ in notis ad _Tertull._ de Præscriptionbus, n. 215 &
_Hieron_ l. 1. contra _Jovinianum_, c. 14. Edit._Erasmi._

[3] Areth. c. 18, 19.

[4] Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 23.

[5] Chrysost. ad Theodorum lapsum.

[6] Hieron. in Epist. ad Gal. l. 3. c. 6.

[7] Apud Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 28. Edit. _Valesii_.

[8] Epiphan. Hæres. 28.

[9] Hieron. adv. Lucif.

[10] 1 Pet. i. 7, 13. iv. 13. & v. 1.

[11] Apoc. xiii. 8.

[12] Apoc. xxi.

[13] Apoc. i. 6. & v. 10.

[14] Apoc. xx. 6.

[15] Apoc. xx. 4, 12.

[16] Apoc. xvii.

[17] Dan. viii. 15, 16, 27. & xii. 8, 9.

[18] [Greek: aselgeias], _in many of the best MSS._

[19] Apoc. xiii. 7, 12.

[20] Apoc. xiii. 1, 5, 6.

[21] Apoc. xviii. 12, 13.

[22] Apoc. xix. 20.

[23] Apoc. xxi. 3, 4.

[24] Apoc. ix. 21. _and_ xvii. 2.

[25] Apoc. xiii. 6.

[26] Apoc. xviii. 3, 7, 9.

[27] [Greek: moichalidos].

[28] Apoc. ii. 14.

[29] Apol. ad Antonin. Pium.

[30] Hæres. l. 1. c. 20. Vide etiam Tertullianum, Apol. c. 13.

[31] Euseb. Chron.

[32] Cyril Catech. 6. Philastr. de hæres. cap. 30. Sulp. Hist. l. 2.
Prosper de promiss. dimid. temp. cap. 13. Maximus serm. 5. in Natal. Apost.
Hegesip. l. 2. c. 2.

[33] Lactant de mortib. Persec. c. 2.

[34] Hom. 70. in Matt. c. 22.

[35] Apud Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 25.

[36] Euseb. Hist. l. 2. c. 25.

[37] Arethas in Proæm. comment. in Apoc.

[38] Euseb. Hist. l. 4. cap. 26. Hieron.

[39] Euseb. Hist. l. 4. c. 24.

[40] Hieron.

[41] Dan. x. 21. xii. 4, 9.

[42] Dan. xii. 4, 10.

[43] Apoc. i. 3.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. II.

_Of the relation which the _Apocalypse_ of _John_ hath to the Book of the
Law of _Moses_, and to the worship of God in the Temple_.

The _Apocalypse_ of _John_ is written in the same style and language with
the Prophecies of _Daniel_, and hath the same relation to them which they
have to one another, so that all of them together make but one complete
Prophecy; and in like manner it consists of two parts, an introductory
Prophecy, and an Interpretation thereof.

The Prophecy is distinguish'd into seven successive parts, by the opening
of the seven seals of the book which _Daniel_ was commanded to seal up: and
hence it is called the _Apocalypse_ or _Revelation_ of _Jesus Christ_. The
time of the seventh seal is sub-divided into eight successive parts by the
silence in heaven for half an hour, and the sounding of seven trumpets
successively: and the seventh trumpet sounds to the battle of the great day
of God Almighty, whereby _the kingdoms of this world become the kingdoms of
the Lord and of his Christ_, and those are destroyed that destroyed the
earth.

The Interpretation begins with the words, _And the temple of God was opened
in heaven, and there was seen in his temple the Ark of his Testament_: and
it continues to the end of the Prophecy. The Temple is the scene of the
visions, and the visions in the Temple relate to the feast of the seventh
month: for the feasts of the _Jews_ were typical of things to come. The
Passover related to the first coming of _Christ_, and the feasts of the
seventh month to his second coming: his first coming being therefore over
before this Prophecy was given, the feasts of the seventh month are here
only alluded unto.

On the first day of that month, in the morning, the High-Priest dressed the
lamps: and in allusion hereunto, this Prophecy begins with a vision of one
like _the Son of man_ in the High-Priest's habit, appearing as it were in
the midst of the seven golden candlesticks, or over against the midst of
them, dressing the lamps, which appeared like a rod of seven stars in his
right hand: and this dressing was perform'd by the sending seven Epistles
to the Angels or Bishops of the seven Churches of _Asia_, which in the
primitive times illuminated the Temple or Church Catholick. These Epistles
contain admonitions against the approaching Apostacy, and therefore relate
to the times when the Apostacy began to work strongly, and before it
prevailed. It began to work in the Apostles days, and was to continue
working _till the man of sin should be revealed_. It began to work in the
disciples of _Simon_, _Menander_, _Carpocrates_, _Cerinthas_, and such
sorts of men as had imbibed the metaphysical philosophy of the _Gentiles_
and _Cabalistical Jews_, and were thence called _Gnosticks_. _John_ calls
them _Antichrists_, saying that in his days there were many _Antichrists_.
But these being condemned by the Apostles, and their immediate disciples,
put the Churches in no danger during the opening of the first four seals.
The visions at the opening of these seals relate only to the civil affairs
of the heathen _Roman_ Empire. So long the Apostolic traditions prevailed,
and preserved the Church in its purity: and therefore the affairs of the
Church do not begin to be considered in this Prophecy before the opening of
the fifth seal. She began then to decline, and to want admonitions; and
therefore is admonished by these Epistles, till the Apostacy prevailed and
took place, which was at the opening of the seventh seal. The admonitions
therefore in these seven Epistles relate to the state of the Church in the
times of the fifth and sixth seals. At the opening of the fifth seal, the
Church is purged from hypocrites by a great persecution. At the opening of
the sixth, that which letted is taken out of the way, namely the heathen
_Roman_ Empire. At the opening of the seventh, the man of sin is revealed.
And to these times the seven Epistles relate.

The seven Angels, to whom these Epistles were written, answer to the seven
_Amarc-holim_, who were Priests and chief Officers of the Temple, and had
jointly the keys of the gates of the Temple, with those of the Treasuries,
and the direction, appointment and oversight of all things in the Temple.

After the lamps were dresed, _John_ saw _the door_ of the Temple _opened_;
and by _the voice as it were of a trumpet_, was called up to the eastern
gate of the great court, to see the visions: and _behold a throne was set_,
viz. the mercy-seat upon the Ark of the Testament, which the _Jews_
respected as _the throne of God between the _Cherubims__, _Exod._ xxv. 2.
_Psal._ xcix. 1. _And he that sat on it was to look upon like _Jasper_ and
_Sardine_ stone_, that is, of an olive colour, the people of _Judea_ being
of that colour. _And_, the Sun being then in the _East, a rainbow was about
the throne_, the emblem of glory. _And round about the throne were four and
twenty seats_; answering to the chambers of the four and twenty Princes of
the Priests, twelve on the south side, and twelve on the north side of the
Priests Court. _And upon the seats were four and twenty Elders sitting,
clothed in white rayment, with crowns on their heads_; representing the
Princes of the four and twenty courses of the Priests clothed in linen.
_And out of the throne proceeded lightnings and thunderings, and voices_,
viz. the flashes of the fire upon the Altar at the morning-sacrifice, and
the thundering voices of those that sounded the trumpets, and sung at the
Eastern gate of the Priests Court; for these being between _John_ and the
throne appeared to him as proceeding from the throne. _And there were seven
lamps of fire burning_, in the Temple, _before the throne, which are the
seven spirits of God_, or Angels of the seven Churches, represented in the
beginning of this Prophecy by seven stars. _And before the throne was a sea
of glass clear as chrystal_; the brazen sea between the porch of the Temple
and the Altar, filled with clear water. _And in the midst of the throne,
and round about the throne, were four Beasts full of eyes before and
behind_: that is, one Beast before the throne and one behind it, appearing
to _John_ as in the midst of the throne, and one on either side in the
circle about it, to represent by the multitude of their eyes the people
standing in the four sides of the peoples court. _And the first Beast was
like a lion, and the second was like a calf, and the third had the face of
a man, and the fourth was like a flying eagle_. The people of _Israel_ in
the wilderness encamped round about the tabernacle, and on the east side
were three tribes under the standard of _Judah_, on the west were three
tribes under the standard of _Ephraim_, on the south were three tribes
under the standard of _Reuben_, and on the north were three tribes under
the standard of _Dan_, _Numb._ ii. And the standard of _Judah_ was a Lion,
that of _Ephraim_ an Ox, that of _Reuben_ a Man, and that of _Dan_ an
Eagle, as the _Jews_ affirm. Whence were framed the hieroglyphicks of
_Cherubims_ and _Seraphims_, to represent the people of _Israel_. A
_Cherubim_ had one body with four faces, the faces of a Lion, an Ox, a Man
and an Eagle, looking to the four winds of heaven, without turning about,
as in _Ezekiel_'s vision, chap. i. And four _Seraphims_ had the same four
faces with four bodies, one face to every body. The four Beasts are
therefore four _Seraphims_ standing in the four sides of the peoples court;
the first in the eastern side with the head of a Lion, the second in the
western side with the head of an Ox, the third in the southern side with
the head of a Man, the fourth in the northern side with the head of an
Eagle: and all four signify together the twelve tribes of _Israel_, out of
whom the hundred forty and four thousand were sealed, _Apoc._ vii. 4. _And
the four Beasts had each of them six wings_, two to a tribe, in all twenty
and four wings, answering to the twenty and four stations of the people.
_And they were full of eyes within_, or under their wings. _And they rest
not day and night_, or at the morning and evening-sacrifices, _saying,
holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come_.
These animals are therefore the Seraphims, which appeared to _Isaiah_ [1]
in a vision like this of the _Apocalypse_. For there also the Lord sat upon
a throne in the temple; and the Seraphims each with six wings cried, _Holy,
holy, holy Lord God of hosts. And when those animals give glory and honour
and thanks to him that sitteth upon the throne, who liveth for ever and
ever, the four and twenty Elders_ go into the Temple, and there _fall down
before him that sitteth on the throne, and worship him that liveth for ever
and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying, Thou art worthy,
O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power: for thou hast created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created_. At the morning and
evening-sacrifices, so soon as the sacrifice was laid upon the Altar, and
the drink-offering began to be poured out, the trumpets sounded, and the
_Levites_ sang by course three times; and every time when the trumpets
sounded, the people fell down and worshiped. Three times therefore did the
people worship; to express which number, the Beasts cry _Holy, holy, holy_:
and the song being ended, the people prayed standing, till the solemnity
was finished. In the mean time the Priests went into the Temple, and there
fell down before him that sat upon the throne, and worshiped.

_And _John_ saw, in the right hand of him that sat upon the throne, a book
written within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals_, viz. the book
which _Daniel_ was commanded to seal up, and which is here represented by
the prophetic book of the Law laid up on the right side of the Ark, as it
were in the right hand of him that sat on the throne: for the festivals and
ceremonies of the Law prescribed to the people in this book, adumbrated
those things which were predicted in the book of _Daniel_; and the writing
within and on the backside of this book, relates to the synchronal
Prophecies. [2] _And none was found worthy to open the book_ but the Lamb
of God. _And lo, in the midst of the throne and of the four Beasts, and in
the midst of the Elders_, that is, at the foot of the Altar, _stood a lamb
as it had been slain_, the morning-sacrifice; _having seven horns_, which
are the seven Churches, _and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God
sent forth into all the earth. And he came, and took the book out of the
right hand of him that sat upon the throne: And when he had taken the book,
the four Beasts and four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb,
having every one of them harps, and golden vials full of odours, which are
the prayers of saints. And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to
take the book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast
redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation; and hast made us, unto our God, Kings and Priests, and
we shall reign on the earth._ The Beasts and Elders therefore represent the
primitive _Christians_ of all nations; and the worship of these
_Christians_ in their Churches is here represented under the form of
worshiping God and the Lamb in the Temple: God for his benefaction in
creating all things, and the Lamb for his benefaction in redeeming us with
his blood: God as sitting upon the throne and living for ever, and the Lamb
as exalted above all by the merits of his death. _And I heard_, saith
_John_, _the voice of many Angels round about the throne, and the Beasts
and the Elders: and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand,
and thousands of thousands; saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb
that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
honour, and glory, and blessing. And every creature which is in heaven, and
on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that
are in them, heard I, saying, Blessing, honour, glory, and power, be unto
him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. And
the four Beasts said, _Amen_. And the four and twenty Elders fell down and
worshiped him that liveth for ever and ever._ This was the worship of the
primitive _Christians_.

It was the custom for the High-Priest, seven days before the fast of the
seventh month, to continue constantly in the Temple, and study the book of
the Law, that he might be perfect in it against the day of expiation;
wherein the service, which was various and intricate, was wholly to be
performed by himself; part of which service was reading the Law to the
people: and to promote his studying it, there were certain Priests
appointed by the _Sanhedrim_ to be with him those seven days in one of his
chambers in the Temple, and there to discourse with him about the Law, and
read it to him, and put him in mind of reading and studying it himself.
This his opening and reading the Law those seven days, is alluded unto in
the Lamb's opening the seals. We are to conceive that those seven days
begin in the evening before each day; for the _Jews_ began their day in the
evening, and that the solemnity of the fast begins in the morning of the
seventh day.

The seventh seal was therefore opened on the day of expiation, and then
_there was silence in heaven for half an hour. And an Angel_, the
High-Priest, _stood at the Altar, having a golden Censer; and there was
given him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all
Saints, upon the golden Altar which was before the throne_. The custom was
on other days, for one of the Priests to take fire from the great Altar in
a silver Censer; but on this day, for the High-Priest to take fire from the
great Altar in a golden Censer: and when he was come down from the great
Altar, he took incense from one of the Priests who brought it to him, and
went with it to the golden Altar: and while he offered the incense, the
people prayed without in silence, which is the silence in heaven for half
an hour. When the High-Priest had laid the incense on the Altar, he carried
a Censer of it burning in his hand, into the most holy place before the
Ark. _And the smoke of the incense, with the prayers of the Saints,
ascended up before God out of the Angel's hand._ On other days there was a
certain measure of incense for the golden Altar: on this day there was a
greater quantity for both the Altar and the most holy Place, and therefore
it is called _much incense_. After this _the Angel took the Censer, and
filled it with fire from the_ great _Altar, and cast it into the earth_;
that is, by the hands of the Priests who belong to his mystical body, he
cast it to the earth without the Temple, for burning the Goat which was the
Lord's lot. _And_ at this and other concomitant sacrifices, until the
evening-sacrifice was ended, _there were voices, and thundrings, and
lightnings, and an earthquake_; that is, the voice of the High-Priest
reading the Law to the people, and other voices and thundrings from the
trumpets and temple-musick at the sacrifices, and lightnings from the fire
of the Altar.

The solemnity of the day of expiation being finished, the seven Angels
found their trumpets at the great sacrifices of the seven days of the feast
of tabernacles; and at the same sacrifices, the seven thunders utter their
voices, which are the musick of the Temple, and singing of the _Levites_,
intermixed with the soundings of the trumpets: and the seven Angels pour
out their vials of wrath, which are the drink-offerings of those
sacrifices.

When six of the seals were opened, _John_ said: [3] _And after these
things_, that is, after the visions of the sixth seal, _I saw four Angels
standing on the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the
earth, that the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on
any tree. And I saw another Angel ascending from the _East_, having the
seal of the living God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four Angels,
to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea, saying, Hurt not the
earth, nor the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our
God in their foreheads._ This sealing alludes to a tradition of the _Jews_,
that upon the day of expiation all the people of _Israel_ are sealed up in
the books of life and death. For the _Jews_ in their _Talmud_ [4] tell us,
that in the beginning of every new year, or first day of the month _Tisri_,
the seventh month of the sacred year, three books are opened in judgment;
the book of life, in which the names of those are written who are perfectly
just; the book of death, in which the names of those are written who are
Atheists or very wicked; and a third book, of those whose judgment is
suspended till the day of expiation, and whose names are not written in the
book of life or death before that day. The first ten days of this month
they call the penitential days; and all these days they fast and pray very
much, and are very devout, that on the tenth day their sins may be
remitted, and their names may be written in the book of life; which day is
therefore called the day of expiation. And upon this tenth day, in
returning home from the Synagogues, they say to one another, _God the
creator seal you to a good year_. For they conceive that the books are now
sealed up, and that the sentence of God remains unchanged henceforward to
the end of the year. The same thing is signified by the two Goats, upon
whose foreheads the High-Priest yearly, on the day of expiation, lays the
two lots inscribed, _For God_ and _For _Azazel__; God's lot signifying the
people who are sealed with the name of God in their foreheads; and the lot
_Azazel_, which was sent into the wilderness, representing those who
receive the mark and name of the Beast, and go into the wilderness with the
great Whore.

The servants of God being therefore sealed in the day of expiation, we may
conceive that this sealing is synchronal to the visions which appear upon
opening the seventh seal; and that when the Lamb had opened six of the
seals and seen the visions relating to the inside of the sixth, he looked
on the backside of the seventh leaf, and then saw _the four Angels holding
the four winds of heaven, and another Angel ascending from the _East_ with
the seal of God_. Conceive also, that the Angels which held the four winds
were the first four of the seven Angels, who upon opening the seventh seal
were seen standing before God; and that upon their holding the winds,
_there was silence in heaven for half an hour_; and that while the servants
of God were sealing, the Angel with the golden Censer offered their prayers
with incense upon the golden Altar, and read the Law: and that so soon as
they were sealed, the winds hurt the earth at the sounding of the first
trumpet, and the sea at the sounding of the second; these winds signifying
the wars, to which the first four trumpets sounded. For as the first four
seals are distinguished from the three last by the appearance of four
horsemen towards the four winds of heaven; so the wars of the first four
trumpets are distinguished from those of the three last, by representing
these by _four winds_, and the others by _three great woes_.

In one of _Ezekiel_'s visions, when the _Babylonian_ captivity was at hand,
_six men_ appeared _with slaughter-weapons_; _and a seventh_, who [5]
appeared _among them clothed in white linen and a writer's ink-horn by his
side_, is commanded to _go thro' the midst of _Jerusalem_, and set a mark
upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and cry for all the abominations
done in the midst thereof_: and then the six men, like the Angels of the
first six trumpets, are commanded to slay those men who are not marked.
Conceive therefore that the hundred forty and four thousand are sealed, to
preserve them from the plagues of the first six trumpets; and that at
length by the preaching of the everlasting gospel, they grow into _a great
multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and
people and tongues_: and at the sounding of the seventh trumpet come out of
the great tribulation _with Palms in their hands: the kingdoms of this
world_, by the war to which that trumpet sounds, _becoming the kingdoms of
God and his _Christ__. For the solemnity of the great _Hosannah_ was kept
by the _Jews_ upon the seventh or last day of the feast of tabernacles; the
_Jews_ upon that day carrying Palms in their hands, and crying _Hosannah_.

After six of the Angels, answering to the six men with slaughter-weapons,
had sounded their trumpets, the Lamb in the form of _a mighty Angel cane
down from heaven clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow was upon his head, and
his face was as it were the Sun, and his feet as pillars of fire_, the
shape in which _Christ_ appeared in the beginning of this Prophecy; _and he
had in his hand a little book open_, the book which he had newly opened;
for he received but one book from him that sitteth upon the throne, and he
alone was worthy to open and look on this book. _And he set his right foot
upon the sea and his left foot on the earth, and cried with a loud voice,
as when a lion roareth_. It was the custom for the High-Priest on the day
of expiation, to stand in an elevated place in the peoples court, at the
Eastern gate of the Priests court, and read the Law to the people, while
the Heifer and the Goat which was the Lord's lot, were burning without the
Temple. We may therefore suppose him standing in such a manner, that his
right foot might appear to _John_ as it were standing on the sea of glass,
and his left foot on the ground of the house; and that he cried with a loud
voice, in reading the Law on the day of expiation. _And when he had cried,
seven thunders uttered their voices_. Thunders are the voice of a cloud,
and a cloud signifies a multitude; and this multitude may be the _Levites_,
who sang with thundering voices, and played with musical instruments at the
great sacrifices, on the seven days of the feast of Tabernacles: at which
times the trumpets also sounded. For the trumpets sounded, and the
_Levites_ sang alternately, three times at every sacrifice. The Prophecy
therefore of the seven thunders is nothing else than a repetition of the
Prophecy of the seven trumpets in another form. _And the Angel which I saw
stand upon the sea and upon the earth, lifted up his hand to heaven, and
sware by him that liveth for ever and ever, that_ after the seven thunders
_there should be time no longer; but in the days of the voice of the
seventh Angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be
finished, as he hath declared to his servants the Prophets_. The voices of
the thunders therefore last to the end of this world, and so do those of
the trumpets.

_And the voice which I heard from heaven_, saith _John_, _spake unto me
again and said, Go and take the little book, &c. And I took the little book
out of the Angel's hand, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth sweet as
honey, and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter. And he said unto
me, Thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues,
and kings_. This is an introduction to a new Prophecy, to a repetition of
the Prophecy of the whole book; and alludes to _Ezekiel_'s eating a roll or
book spread open before him, and written within and without, full of
lamentations and mourning and woe, but sweet in his mouth. Eating and
drinking signify acquiring and possessing; and eating the book is becoming
inspired with the Prophecy contained in it. It implies being inspired in a
vigorous and extraordinary manner with the Prophecy of the whole book, and
therefore signifies a lively repetition of the whole Prophecy by way of
interpretation, and begins not till the first Prophecy, that of the seals
and trumpets, is ended. It was sweet in _John_'s mouth, and therefore
begins not with the bitter Prophecy of the _Babylonian_ captivity, and the
_Gentiles_ being in the outward court of the Temple, and treading the holy
city under foot; and the prophesying of the _two Witnesses_ in sackcloth,
and their smiting the earth with all plagues, and being killed by the
Beast; but so soon as the Prophecy of the trumpets is ended, it begins with
the sweet Prophecy of the glorious _Woman in heaven_, and the victory of
_Michael_ over the Dragon; and after that, it is bitter in _John_'s belly,
by a large description of the times of the great Apostacy.

_And the Angel stood_, upon the earth and sea, _saying, Rise and measure
the Temple of God and the Altar, and them that worship therein_, that is,
their courts with the buildings thereon, viz. the square court of the
Temple called the separate place, and the square court of the Altar called
the Priests court, and the court of them that worship in the Temple called
the new court: _but the_ great _court which is without the Temple, leave
out, and measure it not, for it is given to the _Gentiles_, and the holy
city shall they tread under foot forty and two months_. This measuring hath
reference to _Ezekiel_'s measuring the Temple _of Solomon_: there the whole
Temple, including the outward court, was measured, to signify that it
should be rebuilt in the latter days. Here the courts of the Temple and
Altar, and they who worship therein, are only measured, to signify the
building of a second Temple, for those that are sealed out of all the
twelve tribes of _Israel_, and worship in the inward court of sincerity and
truth: but _John_ is commanded to leave out the outward court, or outward
form of religion and Church-government, because it is given to the
_Babylonian Gentiles_. For the glorious woman in heaven, the remnant of
whole seed kept the commandments of God, and had the testimony of _Jesus_,
continued the same woman in outward form after her flight into the
wilderness, whereby she quitted her former sincerity and piety, and became
the great Whore. She lost her chastity, but kept her outward form and
shape. And while the _Gentiles_ tread the holy city underfoot, and worship
in the outward court, the two witnesses, represented perhaps by the two
feet of the Angel standing on the sea and earth, prophesied against them,
and _had power_, like _Elijah_ and _Moses_, _to consume their enemies with
fire proceeding out of their mouth, and to shut heaven that it rain not in
the days of their Prophecy, and to turn the waters into blood, and to smite
the earth with all plagues as often as they will_, that is, with the
plagues of the trumpets and vials of wrath; and at length they are slain,
rise again from the dead, and ascend up to heaven in a cloud; and then the
seventh trumpet sounds to the day of judgment.

The Prophecy being finished, _John_ is inspired anew by the eaten book, and
begins the Interpretation thereof with these words, _And the Temple of God
was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his Temple the Ark of the
Testament_. By the Ark, we may know that this was the first Temple; for the
second Temple had no Ark. _And there were lightnings, and voices, and
thundrings, and an earthquake, and great hail_. These answer to the wars in
the _Roman_ Empire, during the reign of the four horsemen, who appeared
upon opening the first four seals. _And there appeared a great wonder in
heaven, a woman clothed with the Sun_. In the Prophecy, the affairs of the
Church begin to be considered at the opening of the fifth seal; and in the
Interpretation, they begin at the same time with the vision of the Church
in the form of a woman in heaven: there she is persecuted, and here she is
pained in travail. The Interpretation proceeds down first to the sealing of
the servants of God, and marking the rest with the mark of the Beast; and
then to the day of judgment, represented by a harvest and vintage. Then it
returns back to the times of opening the seventh seal, and interprets the
Prophecy of the seven trumpets by the pouring out of seven vials of wrath.
The Angels who pour them out, come out of the _Temple of the Tabernacle_;
that is, out of the second Temple, for the Tabernacle had no outward court.
Then it returns back again to the times of measuring the Temple and Altar,
and of the _Gentiles_ worshiping in the outward court, and of the Beast
killing the witnesses in the streets of the great city; and interprets
these things by the vision of _a woman sitting on the Beast, drunken with
the blood of the Saints_; and proceeds in the interpretation downwards to
the fall of the great city and the day of judgment.

The whole Prophecy of the book, represented by the book of the Law, is
therefore repeated, and interpreted in the visions which follow those of
sounding the seventh trumpet, and begin with that of the Temple of God
opened in heaven. Only the things, which the seven thunders uttered, were
not written down, and therefore not interpreted.

Notes to Chap. II.

[1] Isa. vi.

[2] Apoc. v.

[3] Apoc. vii

[4] Buxtorf in Synogoga Judaica, c. 18, 21.

[5] Ezek. ix.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. III.

_Of the relation which the Prophecy of _John_ hath to those of _Daniel_;
and of the Subject of the Prophecy_.

The whole scene of sacred Prophecy is composed of three principal parts:
the regions beyond _Euphrates_, represented by the two first Beasts of
_Daniel_; the Empire of the _Greeks_ on this side of _Euphrates_,
represented by the Leopard and by the He-Goat; and the Empire of the
_Latins_ on this side of _Greece_, represented by the Beast with ten horns.
And to these three parts, the phrases of the _third part of the earth, sea,
rivers, trees, ships, stars, sun, and moon_, relate. I place the body of
the fourth Beast on this side of _Greece_, because the three first of the
four Beasts had their lives prolonged after their dominion was taken away,
and therefore belong not to the body of the fourth. He only stamped them
with his feet.

By the _earth_, the _Jews_ understood the great continent of all _Asia_ and
_Africa_, to which they had access by land: and by the Isles of the _sea_,
they understood the places to which they sailed by sea, particularly all
_Europe_: and hence in this Prophecy, the _earth_ and _sea_ are put for the
nations of the _Greek_ and _Latin_ Empires.

The third and fourth Beasts of _Daniel_ are the same with the Dragon and
ten-horned Beast of _John_, but with this difference: _John_ puts the
Dragon for the whole _Roman_ Empire while it continued entire, because it
was entire when that Prophecy was given; and the Beast he considers not
till the Empire became divided: and then he puts the Dragon for the Empire
of the _Greeks_, and the Beast for the Empire of the _Latins_. Hence it is
that the Dragon and Beast have common heads and common horns: but the
Dragon hath crowns only upon his heads, and the Beast only upon his horns;
because the Beast and his horns reigned not before they were divided from
the Dragon: and when the Dragon gave the Beast his throne, the ten horns
received power as Kings, the same hour with the Beast. The heads are seven
successive Kings. Four of them were the four horsemen which appeared at the
opening of the first four seals. In the latter end of the sixth head, or
seal, considered as present in the visions, it is said, _five_ of the seven
Kings _are fallen, and one is, and another is not yet come; and the Beast
that was and is not_, being wounded to death with a sword, _he is the
eighth, and of the seven_: he was therefore a collateral part of the
seventh. The horns are the same with those of _Daniel_'s fourth Beast,
described above.

The four horsemen which appear at the opening of the first four seals, have
been well explained by Mr. _Mede_; excepting that I had rather continue the
third to the end of the reign of the three _Gordians_ and _Philip_ the
_Arabian_, those being Kings from the _South_, and begin the fourth with
the reign of _Decius_, and continue it till the reign of _Dioclesian_. For
the fourth horseman _sat upon a pale_ horse, _and his name was Death; and
hell followed with him; and power was given them to kill unto the fourth
part of the earth, with the sword, and with famine, and with the plague,
and with the Beasts of the earth_, or armies of invaders and rebels: and as
such were the times during all this interval. Hitherto the _Roman_ Empire
continued in an undivided monarchical form, except rebellions; and such it
is represented by the four horsemen. But _Dioclesian_ divided it between
himself and _Maximianus_, A.C. 285; and it continued in that divided state,
till the victory of _Constantine_ the great over _Licinius_, A.C. 323,
which put an end to the heathen persecutions set on foot by _Dioclesian_
and _Maximianus_, and described at the opening of the fifth seal. But this
division of the Empire was imperfect, the whole being still under one and
the same Senate. The same victory of _Constantine_ over _Licinius_ a
heathen persecutor, began the fall of the heathen Empire, described at the
opening of the sixth seal: and the visions of this seal continue till after
the reign of _Julian_ the Apostate, he being a heathen Emperor, and
reigning over the whole _Roman_ Empire.

The affairs of the Church begin to be considered at the opening of the
fifth seal, as was said above. Then she is represented by _a woman_ in the
Temple of heaven, _clothed with the sun_ of righteousness, _and the moon_
of _Jewish_ ceremonies _under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve
stars_ relating to the twelve Apostles and to the twelve tribes of
_Israel_. When she fled from the Temple into the wilderness, she left in
the Temple a _remnant of her seed, who kept the commandments of God, and
had the testimony of Jesus Christ_; and therefore before her flight she
represented the true primitive Church of God, tho afterwards she
degenerated like _Aholah_ and _Aholibah_. In _Diocesian_'s persecution _she
cried, travelling in birth, and pained to be delivered_. And in the end of
that persecution, by the victory of _Constantine_ over _Maxentius_ A.C.
312, _she brought forth a man-child_, such a child as _was to rule all
nations with a rod of iron_, a _Christian_ Empire. _And her child_, by the
victory of _Constantine_ over _Licinius_, A.C. 323, _was caught up unto God
and to his throne. And the woman_, by the division of the _Roman_ Empire
into the _Greek_ and _Latin_ Empires, _fled_ from the first Temple _into
the wilderness_, or spiritually barren Empire of the _Latins_, where she is
found afterwards sitting upon the Beast and upon the seven mountains; and
is called _the great city which reigneth over the Kings of the earth_, that
is, over the ten Kings who give their kingdom to her Beast.

But before her flight there was war in heaven between _Michael_ and the
Dragon, the _Christian_ and the heathen religions; and the Dragon, _that
old serpent, called the Devil and Satan, who deceiveth the whole world, was
cast out to the earth, and his Angels were cast out with him_. And _John
heard a voice in heaven, saying, Now is come salvation and strength, and
the kingdom of our God, and the power of his _Christ_: for the accuser of
our brethren is cast down. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb,
and by the word of their testimony. And they loved not their lives unto the
death. Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe be to
the inhabiters of the earth and sea_, or people of the _Greek_ and _Latin_
Empires, _for the devil is come down amongst you, having great wrath,
because he knoweth that he hath but a short time_.

_And when the Dragon saw that he was cast down_ from the _Roman_ throne,
and the man-child caught up thither, he _persecuted the woman which brought
forth the man-child; and to her_, by the division of the _Roman_ Empire
between the cities of _Rome_ and _Constantinople_ A.C. 330, _were given two
wings of a great eagle_, the symbol of the _Roman_ Empire, _that she might
flee_ from the first Temple _into the wilderness_ of _Arabia, to her place_
at _Babylon_ mystically so called. _And the serpent_, by the division of
the same Empire between the sons of _Constantine_ the great, A.C. 337,
_cast out of his mouth water as a flood_, the _Western_ Empire, _after the
woman; that he might cause her to be carried away by the flood. And the
earth_, or _Greek_ Empire, _helped the woman, and the earth opened her
mouth, and swallowed up the flood_, by the victory of _Constantius_ over
_Magnentius_, A.C. 353, and thus the Beast was wounded to death with a
sword. _And the Dragon was wroth with the woman_, in the reign of _Julian_
the Apostate A.C. 361, _and_, by a new division of the Empire between
_Valentinian_ and _Valens_, A.C. 364, _went_ from her into the _Eastern_
Empire _to make war with the remnant of her seed_, which she left behind
her when she fled: and thus the Beast revived. By the next division of the
Empire, which was between _Gratian_ and _Theodosius_ A.C. 379, the _Beast_
with ten horns _rose out of the sea_, and the _Beast_ with two horns _out
of the earth_: and by the last division thereof, which was between the sons
of _Theodosius_, A.C. 395, _the Dragon gave the Beast his power and throne,
and great authority_. And the ten horns _received power as Kings, the same
hour with the Beast_.

At length the woman arrived at her place of temporal as well as spiritual
dominion upon the back of the Beast, where she is nourished _a time, and
times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent_; not in his kingdom,
but at a distance from him. She is nourished by _the merchants of the
earth_, three times or years and an half, or 42 months, or 1260 days: and
in these Prophecies days are put for years. During all this time the Beast
acted, and _she sat upon him_, that is, reigned over him, and over the ten
Kings _who gave their power and strength_, that is, their kingdom _to the
Beast_; and she was _drunken with the blood of the Saints_. By all these
circumstances she is the eleventh horn of _Daniel_'s fourth Beast, who
reigned with _a look more stout than his fellows_, and was of a different
kind from the rest, and had eyes _and a mouth_ like the woman; _and made
war with the saints, and prevailed against them_, and _wore them out_, and
_thought to change times and laws_, and had them _given into his hand,
until a time, and times, and half a time_. These characters of the woman,
and little horn of the Beast, agree perfectly: in respect of her temporal
dominion, she was a horn of the Beast; in respect of her spiritual
dominion, she rode upon him in the form of a woman, and was his Church, and
committed fornication with the ten Kings.

The second Beast, which _rose up out of the earth_, was the Church of the
_Greek_ Empire: for it _had two horns like those of the Lamb_, and
therefore was a Church; and it _spake as the Dragon_, and therefore was of
his religion; and it _came up out of the earth_, and by consequence in his
kingdom. It is called also _the false Prophet_ who wrought miracles before
the first Beast, by which he deceived them that received his mark, and
worshiped his image. When the Dragon went from the woman to make war with
the remnant of her seed, this Beast arising out of the earth assisted in
that war, and _caused the earth and them which dwell therein to worship_
the authority of _the first Beast, whose mortal wound was healed_, and to
_make an Image to him_, that is, to assemble a body of men like him in
point of religion. He had also _power to give life_ and authority _to the
Image_, so that it could _both speak, and_ by dictating _cause that all_
religious bodies of men, _who would not worship_ the authority of _the
Image, should be_ mystically _killed. And he causeth all men to receive a
mark in their right hand or in their forehead, and that no man might buy or
sell save he that had the mark, or the name of the Beast, or the number of
his name_; all the rest being excommunicated by the Beast with two horns.
His mark is [Cross] [Cross] [Cross], and his name [Greek: LATEINOS], and
the number of his name 666.

Thus the Beast, after he was wounded to death with a sword and revived, was
deified, as the heathens used to deify their Kings after death, and had an
Image erected to him; and his worshipers were initiated in this new
religion, by receiving the mark or name of this new God, or the number of
his name. By killing all that will not worship him and his Image, the first
Temple, illuminated by the lamps of the seven Churches, is demolished, and
a new Temple built for them who will not worship him; and the outward court
of this new Temple, or outward form of a Church, is given to the
_Gentiles_, who worship the Beast and his Image: while they who will not
worship him, are sealed with the name of God in their foreheads, and retire
into the inward court of this new Temple. These are the 144000 sealed out
of all the twelve tribes of _Israel_, and called the _two Witnesses_, as
being derived from the two wings of the woman while she was flying into the
wilderness, and represented by two of the seven candlesticks. These appear
to _John_ in the inward court of the second Temple, standing on mount
_Sion_ with the Lamb, and as it were on the sea of glass. These are _the
Saints of the most High_, and _the host of heaven_, and _the holy people_
spoken of by _Daniel_, as worn out and trampled under foot, and destroyed
in the latter times by the little horns of his fourth Beast and He-Goat.

While the _Gentiles_ tread the holy city under foot, God _gives power to
his two Witnesses, and they prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore
days clothed in sackcloth_. They are called _the two Olive-trees_, with
relation to the two Olive-trees, which in _Zechary_'s vision, chap. iv.
stand on either side of the golden candlestick to supply the lamps with
oil: and Olive-trees, according to the Apostle _Paul_, represent Churches,
_Rom._ xi. They supply the lamps with oil, by maintaining teachers. They
are also called _the two candlesticks_; which in this Prophecy signify
Churches, the seven Churches of _Asia_ being represented by seven
candlesticks. Five of these Churches were found faulty, and threatned if
they did not repent; the other two were without fault, and so their
candlesticks were fit to be placed in the second Temple. These were the
Churches in _Smyrna_ and _Philadelphia_. They were in a state of
tribulation and persecution, and the only two of the seven in such a state:
and so their candlesticks were fit to represent the Churches in affliction
in the times of the second Temple, and the only two of the seven that were
fit. The _two Witnesses_ are not new Churches: they are the posterity of
the primitive Church, the posterity of the two wings of the woman, and so
are fitly represented by two of the primitive candlesticks. We may conceive
therefore, that when the first Temple was destroyed, and a new one built
for them who worship in the inward court, two of the seven candlesticks
were placed in this new Temple.

The affairs of the Church are not considered during the opening of the
first four seals. They begin to be consider'd at the opening of the fifth
seal, as was said above; and are further considered at the opening of the
sixth seal; and the seventh seal contains the times of the great Apostacy.
And therefore I refer the Epistles to the seven Churches unto the times of
the fifth and sixth seals: for they relate to the Church when she began to
decline, and contain admonitions against the great Apostacy then
approaching.

When _Eusebius_ had brought down his _Ecclesiatical History_ to the reign
of _Dioclesian_, he thus describes the state of the Church: _Qualem
quantamque gloriam simul ac libertatem doctrina veræ erga supremum Deum
pietatis à Christo primùm hominibus annunciata, apud omnes Græcos pariter &
barbaros ante persecutionem nostrâ memoriâ excitatam, consecuta sit, nos
certè pro merito explicare non possumus. Argumento esse possit Imperatorum
benignitas erga nostros: quibus regendas etiam provincias committebant,
omni sacrificandi metu eos liberantes ob singularem, qua in religionem
nostram affecti erant, benevolentiam._ And a little after: _Jam vero quis
innumerabilem hominum quotidiè ad fidem Christi confugientium turbam, quis
numerum ecclesiarum in singulis urbibus, quis illustres populorum concursus
in ædibus sacris, cumulatè possit describere? Quo factum est, ut priscis
ædificiis jam non contenti, in singulis urbibus spatiosas ab ipsis
fundamentis exstruerent ecclesias. Atque hæc progressii temporis
increscentia, & quotidiè in majus & melius proficiscentia, nec livor ullus
atterere, nec malignitas dæmonis fascinare, nec hominum insidiæ prohibere
unquam potuerunt, quamdiu omnipotentis Dei dextra populum suum, utpote tali
dignum præsidio, texit atque custodiit. Sed cum ex nimia libertate in
negligentiam ac desidiam prolapsi essemus; cum alter alteri invidere atque
obtrectare cæpisset; cum inter nos quasi bella intestina gereremus, verbis,
tanquam armis quibusdam hastisque, nos mutuò vulnerantes; cum Antistites
adversus Antistites, populi in populos collisi, jurgia ac tumultus
agitarent; denique cum fraus & simulatio ad summum malitiæ culmen
adolevisset: tum divina ultio, levi brachio ut solet, integro adhuc
ecclesiæ statu, & fidelium turbis liberè convenientibus, sensim ac moderatè
in nos cæpit animadvertere; orsà primùm persecutione ab iis qui militabant.
Cum verò sensu omni destituti de placando Dei numine ne cogitaremus quidem;
quin potius instar impiorum quorundam res humanas nullâ providentiâ
gubernari rati, alia quotidiè crimina aliis adjiceremus: cum Pastores
nostri spretâ religionis regulâ, mutuis inter se contentionibus
decertarent, nihil aliud quam jurgia, minas, æmulationem, odia, ac mutuas
inimicitias amplificare studentes; principatum quasi tyrannidem quandam
contentissimè sibi vindicantes: tunc demùm juxta dictum Hieremiæ,
_obscuravit Dominus in ira sua filiam Sion, & dejecit de cælo gloriam
Israel_,--per Ecclesiarum scilicet subversionem_, &c. This was the state of
the Church just before the subversion of the Churches in the beginning of
_Dioclesian_'s persecution: and to this state of the Church agrees the
first of the seven Epistles to the Angel of the seven Churches, [1] that to
the Church in _Ephesus_. _I have something against thee_, saith _Christ_ to
the Angel of that Church, _because thou hast left thy first love. Remember
therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works;
or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out
of its place, except thou repent. But this thou hast, that thou hatest the
deeds of the _Nicolaitans_, which I also hate_. The _Nicolaitans_ are the
_Continentes_ above described, who placed religion in abstinence from
marriage, abandoning their wives if they had any. They are here called
_Nicolaitans_, from _Nicolas_ one of the seven deacons of the primitive
Church of _Jerusalem_; who having a beautiful wife, and being taxed with
uxoriousness, abandoned her, and permitted her to marry whom she pleased,
saying that we must disuse the flesh; and thenceforward lived a single life
in continency, as his children also. The _Continentes_ afterwards embraced
the doctrine of _Æons_ and Ghosts male and female, and were avoided by the
Churches till the fourth century; and the Church of _Ephesus_ is here
commended for hating their deeds.

The persecution of _Dioclesian_ began in the year of _Christ_ 302, and
lasted ten years in the _Eastern_ Empire and two years in the _Western_. To
this state of the Church the second Epistle, to the Church of _Smyrna_,
agrees. _I know_, saith [2] _Christ_, _thy works, and tribulation, and
poverty, but thou art rich; and I know the blasphemy of them, which say
they are _Jews_ and are not, but are the synagogue of Satan. Fear none of
those things which thou shalt suffer: Behold, the Devil shall call some of
you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten
days. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life._
The tribulation of ten days can agree to no other persecution than that of
_Dioclesian_, it being the only persecution which lasted ten years. By _the
blasphemy of them which say they are _Jews_ and are not, but are the
synagogue of Satan_, I understand the Idolatry of the _Nicolaitans_, who
falsly said they were _Christians_.

The _Nicolaitans_ are complained of also in [3] the third Epistle, as men
that _held the doctrine of _Balaam_, who taught _Balac_ to cast a
stumbling-block before the children of _Israel_, to eat things sacrificed
to Idols, and [4] to commit_ spiritual _fornication_. For _Balaam_ taught
the _Moabites_ and _Midianites_ to tempt and invite _Israel_ by their women
to commit fornication, and to feast with them at the sacrifices of their
Gods. The Dragon therefore began now to come down among the inhabitants of
the earth and sea.

The _Nicolaitans_ are also complained of in the fourth Epistle, under the
name of the _woman _Jezabel_, who calleth herself a Prophetess, to teach
and to seduce the servants of _Christ_ to commit fornication, and to eat
things sacrificed to Idols_. The woman therefore began now to fly into the
wilderness.

The reign of _Constantine_ the great from the time of his conquering
_Licinius_, was monarchical over the whole _Roman_ Empire. Then the Empire
became divided between the sons of _Constantine_: and afterwards it was
again united under _Constantius_, by his victory over _Magnentius_. To the
affairs of the Church in these three successive periods of time, the third,
fourth, and fifth Epistles, that is, those to the Angels of the Churches in
_Pergamus_, _Thyatira_, and _Sardis_, seem to relate. The next Emperor was
_Julian_ the Apostate.

In the sixth Epistle, [5] to the Angel of the Church in _Philadelphia_,
_Christ_ saith: _Because_ in the reign of the heathen Emperor _Julian_,
_thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the
hour of temptation, which_ by the woman's flying into the wilderness, and
the Dragon's making war with the remnant of her seed, and the killing of
all who will not worship the Image of the Beast, _shall come upon all the
world, to try them that dwell upon the earth_, and to distinguish them by
sealing the one with the name of God in their foreheads, and marking the
other with the mark of the Beast. _Him that overcometh, I will make a
pillar in the Temple of my God; and he shall go no more out_ of it. _And I
will write upon him the name of my God_ in his forehead. So the
_Christians_ of the Church of _Philadelphia_, as many of them as overcome,
are sealed with the seal of God, and placed in the second Temple, and go no
more out. The same is to be understood of the Church in _Smyrna_, which
also kept the word of God's patience, and was without fault. These two
Churches, with their posterity, are therefore the _two Pillars_, and the
_two Candlesticks_, and the _two Witnesses_ in the second Temple.

After the reign of the Emperor _Julian,_ and his successor _Jovian_ who
reigned but five months, the Empire became again divided between
_Valentinian_ and _Valens_. Then the Church Catholick, in the Epistle to
the Angel of the Church of _Laodicea_, is reprehended as _lukewarm_, and
[6] threatned to be _spewed out of _Christ's_ mouth_. She said, that she
was _rich and increased with goods, and had need of nothing_, being in
outward prosperity; _and knew not that she was_ inwardly _wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked_. She is therefore _spewed out of
_Christ's_ mouth_ at the opening of the seventh seal: and this puts an end
to the times of the first Temple.

About one half of the _Roman_ Empire turned _Christians_ in the time of
_Constantine_ the great and his sons. After _Julian_ had opened the
Temples, and restored the worship of the heathens, the Emperors
_Valentinian_ and _Valens_ tolerated it all their reign; and therefore the
Prophecy of the sixth seal was not fully accomplished before the reign of
their successor _Gratian_. It was the custom of the heathen Priests, in the
beginning of the reign of every sovereign Emperor, to offer him the dignity
and habit of the _Pontifex Maximus_. This dignity all Emperors had hitherto
accepted: but _Gratian_ rejected it, threw down the idols, interdicted the
sacrifices, and took away their revenues with the salaries and authority of
the Priests. _Theodosius_ the great followed his example; and heathenism
afterwards recovered itself no more, but decreased so fast, that
_Prudentius_, about ten years after the death of _Theodosius_, called the
heathens, _vix pauca ingenia & pars hominum rarissima_. Whence the affairs
of the sixth seal ended with the reign of _Valens_, or rather with the
beginning of the reign of _Theodosius_, when he, like his predecessor
_Gratian_, rejected the dignity of _Pontifex Maximus_. For the _Romans_
were very much infested by the invasions of foreign nations in the reign of
_Valentinian_ and _Valens_: _Hoc tempore_, saith _Ammianus_, _velut per
universum orbem Romanum bellicum canentibus buccinis, excitæ gentes
sævissimæ limites sibi proximos persultabant: Gallias Rhætiasque simul
Alemanni populabantur: Sarmatæ Pannonias & Quadi: Picti, Saxones, & Scoti &
Attacotti Britannos ærumnis vexavere continuis: Austoriani, Mauricæque aliæ
gentes Africam solito acriùs incursabant: Thracias diripiebant prædatorii
globi Gotthorum: Persarum Rex manus Armeniis injectabat_. And whilst the
Emperors were busy in repelling these enemies, the _Hunns_ and _Alans_ and
_Goths_ came over the _Danube_ in two bodies, overcame and slew _Valens_,
and made so great a slaughter of the _Roman_ army, that _Ammianus_ saith:
_Nec ulla Annalibus præter Cannensem ita ad internecionem res legitur
gesta_. These wars were not fully stopt on all sides till the beginning of
the reign of _Theodosius_, A.C. 379 & 380: but thenceforward the Empire
remained quiet from foreign armies, till his death, A.C. 395. So long the
four winds were held: and so long there was silence in heaven. And the
seventh seal was opened when this silence began.

Mr. _Mede_ hath explained the Prophecy of the first six trumpets not much
amiss: but if he had observed, that the Prophecy of pouring out the vials
of wrath is synchronal to that of sounding the trumpets, his explanation
would have been yet more complete.

The name of _Woes_ is given to the wars to which the three last trumpets
sound, to distinguish them from the wars of the four first. The sacrifices
on the first four days of the feast of Tabernacles, at which the first four
trumpets sound, and the first four vials of wrath are poured out, are
slaughters in four great wars; and these wars are represented by four winds
from the four corners of the earth. The first was an east wind, the second
a west wind, the third a south wind, and the fourth a north wind, with
respect to the city of _Rome_, the metropolis of the old _Roman_ Empire.
These four plagues fell upon _the third part of the Earth, Sea, Rivers,
Sun, Moon and Stars_; that is, upon the Earth, Sea, Rivers, Sun, Moon and
Stars of the third part of the whole scene of these Prophecies of _Daniel_
and _John_.

The plague of the eastern wind [7] at the sounding of the first trumpet,
was to fall upon the _Earth_, that is, upon the nations of the _Greek_
Empire. Accordingly, after the death of _Theodosius_ the great, the
_Goths_, _Sarmatians_, _Hunns_, _Isaurians_, and _Austorian_ Moors invaded
and miserably wasted _Greece_, _Thrace_, _Asia minor_, _Armenia_, _Syria_,
_Egypt_, _Lybia_, and _Illyricum_, for ten or twelve years together.

The plague of the western wind at the sounding of the second trumpet, was
to fall upon the _Sea_, or _Western_ Empire, by means of _a great mountain
burning with fire_ cast into it, and _turning it to blood_. Accordingly in
the year 407, that Empire began to be invaded by the _Visigoths_,
_Vandals_, _Alans_, _Sueves_, _Burgundians_, _Ostrogoths_, _Heruli_,
_Quadi_, _Gepides_; and by these wars it was broken into ten kingdoms, and
miserably wasted: and _Rome_ itself, the burning mountain, was besieged and
taken by the _Ostrogoths_, in the beginning of these miseries.

The plague of the southern wind at the sounding of the third trumpet, was
to cause _a great star, burning as it were a lamp, to fall from heaven upon
the rivers and fountains of waters_, the _Western_ Empire now divided into
many kingdoms, and to turn them to _wormwood_ and _blood_, and make them
_bitter_. Accordingly _Genseric_, the King of the _Vandals_ and _Alans_ in
_Spain_, A.C. 427, enter'd _Africa_ with an army of eighty thousand men;
where he invaded the _Moors_, and made war upon the _Romans_, both there
and on the sea-coasts of _Europe_, for fifty years together, almost without
intermission, taking _Hippo_ A.C. 431, and _Carthage_ the capital of
_Africa_ A.C. 439. In A.C. 455, with a numerous fleet and an army of three
hundred thousand _Vandals_ and _Moors_, he invaded _Italy_, took and
plundered _Rome_, _Naples_, _Capua_, and many other cities; carrying thence
their wealth with the flower of the people into _Africa_: and the next
year, A.C. 456, he rent all _Africa_ from the Empire, totally expelling the
_Romans_. Then the _Vandals_ invaded and took the Islands of the
_Mediterranean_, _Sicily_, _Sardinia_, _Corsica_, _Ebusus_, _Majorca_,
_Minorca_, &c. and _Ricimer_ besieged the Emperer _Anthemius_ in _Rome_,
took the city, and gave his soldiers the plunder, A.C. 472. The _Visigoths_
about the same time drove the _Romans_ out of _Spain_: and now the
_Western_ Emperor, the _great star which fell from heaven, burning as it
were a lamp_, having by all these wars gradually lost almost all his
dominions, was invaded, and conquered in one year by _Odoacer_ King of the
_Heruli_, A.C. 476. After this the _Moors_ revolted A.C. 477, and weakned
the _Vandals_ by several wars, and took _Mauritania_ from them. These wars
continued till the _Vandals_ were conquered by _Belisarius_, A.C. 534. and
by all these wars _Africa_ was almost depopulated, according to
_Procopius_, who reckons that above five millions of men perished in them.
When the _Vandals_ first invaded _Africa_, that country was very populous,
consisting of about 700 bishopricks, more than were in all _France_,
_Spain_ and _Italy_ together: but by the wars between the _Vandals_,
_Romans_ and _Moors_, it was depopulated to that degree, that _Procopius_
tells us, it was next to a miracle for a traveller to see a man.

In pouring out the third vial it is [8] said: _Thou art righteous, O
Lord,--because thou hast judged thus: for they have shed the blood of thy
Saints and Prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink, for they are
worthy_. How they shed the blood of Saints, may be understood by the
following Edict of the Emperor _Honorius_, procured by four Bishops sent to
him by a Council of _African_ Bishops, who met at _Carthage_ 14 _June_,
A.C. 410.

_Impp. Honor. &. Theod. AA. Heracliano Com. Afric._

_Oraculo penitus remoto, quo ad ritus suos hæreticæ superstitionis
abrepserant, sciant omnes sanctæ legis inimici, plectendos se poena &
proscriptionis & sanguinis, si ultra convenire per publicum, execrandâ
sceleris sui temeritate temptaverint. Dat. _viii._ Kal. Sept. Varano V.C.
Cons._ A.C. 410.

Which Edict was five years after fortified by the following.

_Impp. Honor. & Theod. AA. Heracliano Com. Afric._

_Sciant cuncti qui ad ritus suos hæresis superstitionibus obrepserant
sacrosanctæ legis inimici, plectendos se poenâ & proscriptionis &
sanguinis, si ultra convenire per publicum exercendi sceleris sui
temeritate temptaverint: ne quâ vera divinaque reverentia contagione
temeretur. Dat. _viii._ Kal. Sept. Honorio _x._ & Theod. _vi._ AA. Coss._
A.C. 415.

These Edicts being directed to the governor of _Africa_, extended only to
the _Africans_. Before these there were many severe ones against the
_Donatists_, but they did not extend to blood. These two were the first
which made their meetings, and the meetings of all dissenters, capital: for
by _hereticks_ in these Edicts are meant all dissenters, as is manifest by
the following against _Euresius_ a _Luciferan_ Bishop.

_Impp. Arcad. & Honor. AA. Aureliano Proc. Africæ._

_Hæreticorum vocabulo continentur, & latis adversus eos sanctionibus debent
succumbere, qui vel levi argumento à judicio Catholicæ religionis & tramite
detecti fuerint deviare: ideoque experientia tua Euresium hæreticum esse
cognoscat. Dat. _iii._ Non. Sept. Constantinop. Olybrio & Probino Coss._
A.C. 395.

The _Greek_ Emperor _Zeno_ adopted _Theoderic_ King of the _Ostrogoths_ to
be his son, made him master of the horse and _Patricius_, and Consul of
_Constantinople_; and recommending to him the _Roman_ people and Senate,
gave him the _Western_ Empire, and sent him into _Italy_ against _Odoacer_
King of the _Heruli_. _Theoderic_ thereupon led his nation into _Italy_,
conquered _Odoacer_, and reigned over _Italy_, _Sicily_, _Rhætia_,
_Noricum_, _Dalmatia_, _Liburnia_, _Istria_, and part of _Suevia_,
_Pannonia_ and _Gallia_. Whence _Ennodius_ said, in a Panegyric to
_Theoderic_: _Ad limitem suum Romana regna remeâsse._ _Theoderic_ reigned
with great prudence, moderation and felicity; treated the _Romans_ with
singular benevolence, governed them by their own laws, and restored their
government under their Senate and Consuls, he himself supplying the place
of Emperor, without assuming the title. _Ita sibi parentibus præfuit_,
saith _Procopius_, _ut vere Imperatori conveniens decus nullum ipsi
abesset: Justitiæ magnus ei cultus, legumque diligens custodia: terras à
vicinis barbaris servavit intactas_, &c. Whence I do not reckon the reign
of this King, amongst the plagues of the four winds.

The plague of the northern wind, at the sounding of the fourth trumpet, was
to cause _the Sun, Moon and Stars_, that is, the King, kingdom and Princes
of the _Western_ Empire, _to be darkned_, and to continue some time in
darkness. Accordingly _Belisarius_, having conquered the _Vandals_, invaded
_Italy_ A.C. 535, and made war upon the _Ostrogoths_ in _Dalmatia_,
_Liburnia_, _Venetia_, _Lombardy_, _Tuscany_, and other regions northward
from _Rome_, twenty years together. In this war many cities were taken and
retaken. In retaking _Millain_ from the _Romans_, the _Ostrogoths_ slew all
the males young and old, amounting, as _Procopius_ reckons, to three
hundred thousand, and sent the women captives to their allies the
_Burgundians_. _Rome_ itself was taken and retaken several times, and
thereby the people were thinned; the old government by a Senate ceased, the
nobles were ruined, and all the glory of the city was extinguish'd: and
A.C. 552, after a war of seventeen years, the kingdom of the _Ostrogoths_
fell; yet the remainder of the _Ostrogoths_, and an army of _Germans_
called in to their assistance, continued the war three or four years
longer. Then ensued the war of the _Heruli_, who, as _Anastasius_ tells us,
_perimebant cunctam Italiam_, slew all _Italy_. This was followed by the
war of the _Lombards_, the fiercest of all the _Barbarians_, which began
A.C. 568, and lasted for thirty eight years together; _factâ tali clade_,
saith _Anastasius_, _qualem à sæculo nullus meminit_; ending at last in the
Papacy of _Sabinian_, A.C. 605, by a peace then made with the _Lombards_.
Three years before this war ended, _Gregory_ the great, then Bishop of
_Rome_, thus speaks of it: _Qualiter enim & quotidianis gladiis & quantis
Longobardorum incursionibus, ecce jam per triginta quinque annorum
longitudinem premimur, nullis explere vocibus suggestionis valemus_: and in
one of his Sermons to the people, he thus expresses the great consumption
of the _Romans_ by these wars: _Ex illa plebe innumerabili quanti
remanseritis aspicitis, & tamen adhuc quotidiè flagella urgent, repentini
casus opprimunt, novæ res & improvisæ clades affligunt_. In another Sermon
he thus describes the desolations: _Destructæ urbes, eversa sunt castra,
depopulati agri, in solitudinem terra redacta est. Nullus in agris incola,
penè nullus in urbibus habitator remansit. Et tamen ipsæ parvæ generis
humani reliquiæ adhuc quotidiè & sine cessatione feriuntur, & finem non
habent flagella coelestis justitiæ. Ipsa autem quæ aliquando mundi Domina
esse videbatur, qualis remansit Roma conspicimus innumeris doloribus
multipliciter attrita, defolatione civium, impressione hostium, frequentiâ
ruinarum.--Ecce jam de illa omnes hujus fæculi potentes ablati sunt.--Ecce
populi defecerunt.--Ubi enim Senatus? Ubi jam populus? Contabuerunt ossa,
consumptæ sunt carnes. Omnis enim sæcularium dignitatum ordo extinctus est,
& tamen ipsos vos paucos qui remansimus, adhuc quotidié gladii, adhuc
quotidié innumeræ tribulationes premunt.--Vacua jam ardet Roma. Quid autem
ista de hominibus dicimus? Cum ruinis crebrescentibus ipsa quoque destrui
ædificia videmus. Postquam defecerunt homines etiam parietes cadunt. Jam
ecce desolata, ecce contrita, ecce gemitibus oppressa est,_ &c. All this
was spoken by _Gregory_ to the people of _Rome_, who were witnesses of the
truth of it. Thus by _the plagues of the four winds_, the Empire of the
_Greeks_ was shaken, and the Empire of the _Latins_ fell; and _Rome_
remained nothing more than the capital of a poor dukedom, subordinate to
_Ravenna_, the seat of the Exarchs.

The fifth trumpet sounded to the wars, which the _King of the_ South, as he
is called by _Daniel_, made _in the time of the end_, in _pushing at the
King who did according to his will_. This plague began with the _opening of
the bottomless pit_, which denotes the letting out of a false religion: the
_smoke which came out of the pit_, signifying the multitude which embraced
that religion; and the _locusts which came out of the smoke_, the armies
which came out of that multitude. This pit was opened, to let out smoke and
locusts into the regions of the four monarchies, or some of them. _The King
of these locusts_ was the _Angel of the bottomless pit_, being chief
governor as well in religious as civil affairs, such as was the Caliph of
the _Saracens_. Swarms of locusts often arise in _Arabia fælix_, and from
thence infest the neighbouring nations: and so are a very fit type of the
numerous armies of _Arabians_ invading the _Romans_. They began to invade
them A.C. 634, and to reign at _Damascus_ A.C. 637. They built _Bagdad_
A.C. 766, and reigned over _Persia_, _Syria_, _Arabia_, _Egypt_, _Africa_
and _Spain_. They afterwards lost _Africa_ to _Mahades_, A.C. 910; _Media_,
_Hircania_, _Chorasan_, and all _Persia_, to the _Dailamites_, between the
years 927 and 935; _Mesopotamia_ and _Miafarekin_ to _Nasiruddaulas_, A.C.
930; _Syria_ and _Egypt_ to _Achsjid_, A.C. 935, and now being in great
distress, the Caliph of _Bagdad_, A.C. 936, surrendred all the rest of his
temporal power to _Mahomet_ the son of _Rajici_, King of _Wasit_ in
_Chaldea_, and made him Emperor of Emperors. But _Mahomet_ within two years
lost _Bagdad_ to the _Turks_; and thenceforward _Bagdad_ was sometimes in
the hands of the _Turks_, and sometimes in the hands of the _Saracens_,
till _Togrul-beig_, called also _Togra_, _Dogrissa_, _Tangrolipix_, and
_Sadoc_, conquered _Chorasan_ and _Persia_; and A.C. 1055, added _Bagdad_
to his Empire, making it the seat thereof. His successors _Olub-Arflan_ and
_Melechschah_, conquered the regions upon _Euphrates_; and these conquests,
after the death of _Melechschah_, brake into the kingdoms of _Armenia_,
_Mesopotamia_, _Syria_, and _Cappadocia_. The whole time that the Caliphs
of the _Saracens_ reigned with a temporal dominion at _Damascus_ and
_Bagdad_ together, was 300 years, viz. from the year 637 to the year 936
inclusive. Now locusts live but five months; and therefore, for the decorum
of the type, these locusts are said to _hurt men five months and five
months_, as if they had lived about five months at _Damascus_, and again
about five months at _Bagdad_; in all ten months, or 300 prophetic days,
which are years.

The sixth trumpet sounded to the wars, which _Daniel_'s King of the _North_
made against the King above-mentioned, _who did according to his will_. In
these wars the King of the _North_, according to _Daniel_, conquered the
Empire of the _Greeks_, and also _Judea_, _Egypt_, _Lybia_, and _Ethiopia_:
and by these conquests the Empire of the _Turks_ was set up, as may be
known by the extent thereof. These wars commenced A.C. 1258, when the four
kingdoms of the _Turks_ seated upon _Euphrates_, that of _Armenia major_
seated at _Miyapharekin_, _Megarkin_ or _Martyropolis_, that of
_Mesopotamia_ seated at _Mosul_, that of all _Syria_ seated at _Aleppo_,
and that of _Cappadocia_ seated at _Iconium_, were invaded by the _Tartars_
under _Hulacu_, and driven into the western parts of _Asia minor_, where
they made war upon the _Greeks_, and began to erect the present Empire of
the _Turks_. Upon the sounding of the sixth trumpet, [9] _John heard a
voice from the four horns of the golden Altar which is before God, saying
to the sixth Angel which had the trumpet, Loose the four Angels which are
bound at the great river _Euphrates_. And the four Angels were loosed,
which were prepared for an hour and a day, and a month and a year, for to
slay the third part of men_. By the four horns of the golden Altar, is
signified the situation of the head cities of the said four kingdoms,
_Miyapharekin_, _Mosul_, _Aleppo_, and _Iconium_, which were in a
quadrangle. They slew the third part of men, when they conquered the
_Greek_ Empire, and took _Constantinople_, A.C. 1453. and they began to be
prepared for this purpose, when _Olub-Arslan_ began to conquer the nations
upon _Euphrates_, A.C. 1063. The interval is called an hour and a day, and
a month and a year, or 391 prophetic days, which are years. In the first
thirty years, _Olub-Arslan_ and _Melechschah_ conquered the nations upon
_Euphrates_, and reigned over the whole. _Melechschah_ died A.C. 1092, and
was succeeded by a little child; and then this kingdom broke into the four
kingdoms above-mentioned.

       *       *       *       *       *

Notes to Chap. III.

[1] Apoc. ii. 4, &c.

[2] Apoc. ii. 9, 10.

[3] Ver. 14.

[4] Numb. xxv. 1, 2, 18, & xxi. 16.

[5] Apoc. iii. 10, 12.

[6] Apoc. iii. 16, 17.

[7] Apoc. viii. 7, &c.

[8] Apoc. xvi. 5, 6.

[9] Apoc. ix. 13, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_THE END._

       *       *       *       *       *

_Advertisement._

_The last pages of these Observations having been differently drawn up by
the Author in another copy of his Work; they are here inserted as they
follow in that copy, after the 22d line of the 261st page foregoing._

       *       *       *       *       *

_And none was found worthy to open the book_ till the Lamb of God appeared;
the great High-Priest represented by a lamb slain at the foot of the Altar
in the morning-sacrifice. _And he came, and took the book out of the hand
of him that sat upon the throne._ For the High-Priest, in the feast of the
seventh month, went into the most holy place, and took the book of the law
out of the right side of the Ark, to read it to the people: and in order to
read it well, he studied it seven days, that is, upon the fourth, fifth,
sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth days, being attended by some of the
priests to hear him perform. These seven days are alluded to, by the Lamb's
opening the seven seals successively.

Upon the tenth day of the month, a young bullock was offered for a
sin-offering for the High-Priest, and a goat for a sin-offering for the
people: and lots were cast upon two goats to determine which of them should
be God's lot for the sin-offering; and the other goat was called _Azazel_,
the scape-goat. The High-Priest in his linen garments, took a censer full
of burning coals of fire from the Altar, his hand being full of sweet
incense beaten small; and went into the most holy place within the veil,
and put the incense upon the fire, and sprinkled the blood of the bullock
with his finger upon the mercy-seat and before the mercy-seat seven times;
and then he killed the goat which fell to God's lot, for a sin-offering for
the people, and brought his blood within the veil, and sprinkled it also
seven times upon the mercy-seat and before the mercy-seat. Then he went out
to the Altar, and sprinkled it also seven times with the blood of the
bullock, and as often with the blood of the goat. After this _he laid both
his hands upon the head of the live goat; and confessed over him all the
iniquities of the children of _Israel_, and all their transgressions in all
their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat; and sent him away into
the wilderness by the hands of a fit man: and the goat bore upon him all
their iniquities into a land not inhabited_, Levit. chap. iv. & chap. xvi.
While the High-Priest was doing these things in the most holy place and at
the Altar, the people continued at their devotion quietly and in silence.
Then the High-Priest went into the holy place, put off his linen garments,
and put on other garments; then came out, and sent the bullock and the goat
of the sin-offering to be burnt without the camp, with fire taken in a
censer from the Altar: and as the people returned home from the Temple,
they said to one another, _God seal you to a good new year_.

In allusion to all this, _when he had opened the seventh seal, there was
silence in heaven about the space of half an hour. And an Angel stood at
the Altar having a golden Censer, and there was given unto him much
incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints, upon the
golden Altar which was before the throne. And the smoke of the incense with
the prayers of the Saints ascended up before God out of the Angel's hand.
And the Angel took the Censer, and filled it with fire of the Altar, and
cast it to the earth_, suppose without the camp, for sacrificing the goat
which fell to God's lot. For the High-Priest being _Christ_ himself, the
bullock is omitted. At this sacrifice _there were voices and thundrings_,
of the musick of the Temple, _and lightnings_ of the sacred fire, _and an
earthquake_: and synchronal to these things was the sealing of _the 144000
out of all the twelve tribes of the children of _Israel_ with the seal of
God in their foreheads_, while the rest of the twelve tribes received the
mark of the Beast, and the Woman fled from the Temple into the wilderness
to her place upon this Beast. For this sealing and marking was represented
by casting lots upon the two goats, sacrificing God's lot on mount _Sion_,
and sending the scape-goat into the wilderness loaden with the sins of the
people.

Upon the fifteenth day of the month, and the six following days, there were
very great sacrifices. And in allusion to the sounding of trumpets, and
singing with thundring voices, and pouring out drink-offerings at those
sacrifices, _seven trumpets are sounded_, and _seven thunders utter their
voices_, and _seven vials of wrath are poured out_. Wherefore the sounding
of the _seven trumpets_, the voices of the _seven thunders_, and the
pouring out of the _seven vials of wrath_, are synchronal, and relate to
one and the same division of the time of the seventh seal following the
silence, into seven successive parts. The seven days of this feast were
called the feast of Tabernacles; and during these seven days the children
of _Israel_ dwelt in booths, and rejoiced with palm-branches in their
hands. To this alludes _the multitude with palms in their hands_, which
appeared after the sealing of the 144000, and _came out of the great
tribulation_ with triumph at the battle of the great day, to which the
seventh trumpet sounds. The visions therefore of the 144000, and of the
palm-bearing multitude, extend to the sounding of the seventh trumpet, and
therefore are synchronal to the times of the seventh seal.

When the 144000 _are sealed out of all the twelve tribes of _Israel__, and
the rest receive _the mark of the Beast_, and thereby the first temple is
destroyed; _John_ is bidden to _measure the temple and altar_, that is,
their courts, _and them that worship therein_, that is, the 144000 standing
on mount _Sion_ and on the sea of glass: _but the court that is without the
temple_, that is, the peoples court, to _leave out and measure it not,
because it is given to the_ Gentiles, those who receive the mark of the
Beast; _and the holy city they shall tread under foot forty and two
months_, that is, all the time that the Beast acts under the woman
_Babylon_: and _the two witnesses prophesy 1260 days_, that is, all the
same time, _clothed in sackcloth. These have power_, like _Elijah, to shut
heaven that it rain not_, at the sounding of the first trumpet; and, like
_Moses, to turn the waters into blood_ at the sounding of the second; _and
to smite the earth with all plagues_, those of the trumpets, _as often as
they will_. These prophesy at the building of the second temple, like
_Haggai_ and _Zechary_. These are _the two Olive-trees_, or Churches, which
_supplied the lamps with oil_, _Zech._ iv. These are _the two
candlesticks_, or Churches, _standing before the God of the earth_. Five of
the seven Churches of _Asia_, those in prosperity, are found fault with,
and exhorted to repent, and threatned to be _removed out of their places_,
or _spewed out of _Christ's_ mouth_, or _punished with the sword of
_Christ's_ mouth, except they repent_: the other two, the Churches of
_Smyrna_ and _Philadelphia_, which were under persecution, remain in a
state of persecution, to illuminate the second temple. When the primitive
Church catholick, represented by _the woman in heaven_, apostatized, and
became divided into two corrupt Churches, represented by the _whore of
_Babylon__ and the _two-horned Beast_, the 144000 _who were sealed out of
all the twelve tribes_, became the _two Witnesses_, in opposition to those
two false Churches: and the name of _two Witnesses_ once imposed, remains
to the true Church of God in all times and places to the end of the
Prophecy.

In the interpretation of this Prophecy, _the woman in heaven clothed with
the sun_, before she flies into the wilderness, represents the primitive
Church catholick, illuminated with the _seven lamps_ in the _seven golden
candlesticks_, which are the _seven Churches_ of _Asia_. The Dragon
signifies the same Empire with _Daniel_'s He-goat in the reign of his last
horn, that is, the whole _Roman_ Empire, until it became divided into the
_Greek_ and _Latin_ Empires; and all the time of that division it signifies
the _Greek_ Empire alone: and the Beast is _Daniel_'s fourth Beast, that
is, the Empire of the _Latins_. Before the division of the _Roman_ Empire
into the _Greek_ and _Latin_ Empires, the Beast is included in the body of
the Dragon; and from the time of that division, the Beast is the _Latin_
Empire only. Hence the Dragon and Beast have the same heads and horns; but
the heads are crowned upon the Dragon, and the horns upon the Beast. The
horns are ten kingdoms, into which the Beast becomes divided presently
after his separation from the Dragon, as hath been described above. The
heads are seven successive dynasties, or parts, into which the _Roman_
Empire becomes divided by the opening of the seven seals. Before the woman
fled into the wilderness, _she being with child_ of a Christian Empire,
_cried travelling_, viz. in the ten years persecution of _Dioclesian_, _and
pained to be delivered: and the Dragon_, the heathen _Roman_ Empire, _stood
before her, to devour her child as soon as it was born. And she brought
forth a man child, who_ at length _was to rule all nations with a rod of
iron. And her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne_ in the
Temple, by the victory of _Constantine_ the great over _Maxentius_: _and
the woman fled_ from the Temple _into the wilderness_ of _Arabia_ to
_Babylon_, _where she hath a place_ of riches and honour and dominion, upon
the back of the Beast, _prepared of God, that they should feed her there
1260 days. And there was war in heaven_, between the heathens under
_Maximinus_ and the new Christian Empire; _and the great Dragon was cast
out, that old serpent, which deceiveth the whole world_, the spirit of
heathen idolatry; _he was cast out_ of the throne _into the earth. And they
overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony;
and they loved not their lives unto the death_.

_And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the
woman which brought forth the man child_, stirring up a new persecution
against her in the reign of _Licinius_. _And to the woman_, by the building
of _Constantinople_ and equalling it to _Rome_, _were given two wings of a
great eagle, that she might flee into the wilderness into her place_ upon
the back of her Beast, _where she is nourished for a time, and times, and
half a time, from the face of the serpent. And the serpent_, upon the death
of _Constantine_ the great, _cast out of his mouth water as a flood_, viz.
the _Western_ Empire under _Constantine junior_ and _Constans_, _after the
woman: that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood. And the
earth_, the nations of _Asia_ now under _Constantinople_, _helped the
woman_; and by conquering the _Western_ Empire, now under _Magnentius_,
_swallowed up the flood which the Dragon cast out of his mouth. And the
Dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of
her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of
_Jesus Christ_, which_ in that war _were sealed out of all the twelve
tribes of _Israel__, and remained upon mount _Sion_ with the Lamb, being in
number 144000, and having their father's name written in their foreheads.

When the earth had swallowed up the flood, and the Dragon was gone to make
war with the remnant of the woman's seed, _John stood upon the sand of the
sea, and saw a Beast rise out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns.
And the Beast was like unto a Leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a
Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion._ _John_ here names _Daniel_'s
four Beasts in order, putting his Beast in the room of _Daniel_'s fourth
Beast, to shew that they are the same. _And the Dragon gave_ this Beast
_his power and his seat and great authority_, by relinquishing the
_Western_ Empire to him. _And one of his heads_, the sixth, was _as it were
wounded to death_, viz. by the sword of the earth, which swallowed up the
waters cast out of the mouth of the Dragon; _and his deadly wound was
healed_, by a new division of the Empire between _Valentinian_ and
_Valens_, _An._ 364. _John_ saw the Beast rise out of the sea, at the
division thereof between _Gratian_ and _Theodosius_, _An._ 379. The Dragon
gave the Beast his power, and his seat and great authority, at the death of
_Theodosius_, when _Theodosius_ gave the _Western_ Empire to his son
_Honorius_. After which the two Empires were no more united: but the
_Western_ Empire became presently divided into ten kingdoms, as above; and
these kingdoms at length united in religion under the woman, and reign with
her _forty and two months_.

_And I beheld_, saith _John_, _another Beast coming up out of the earth._
When the woman fled from the Dragon into the kingdom of the Beast, and
became his Church, this other Beast rose up out of the earth, to represent
the Church of the Dragon. For _he had two horns like the Lamb_, such as
were the bishopricks of _Alexandria_ and _Antioch_: _and he spake as the
Dragon_ in matters of religion: _and he causeth the earth_, or nations of
the Dragon's kingdom, _to worship the first Beast, whose deadly wound was
healed_, that is, to be of his religion. _And he doth great wonders, so
that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of
men_; that is, he excommunicateth those who differ from him in point of
religion: for in pronouncing their excommunications, they used to swing
down a lighted torch from above. _And he said to them that dwell on the
earth, that they should make an image to the Beast, which had the wound by
a sword, and did live_; that is, that they should call a Council of men of
the religion of this Beast. _And he had power to give life unto the image
of the Beast, that the image of the Beast should both speak, and cause that
as many as would not worship the image of the Beast should be killed_, viz.
mystically, by dissolving their Churches. _And he causeth all both small
and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right
band or in their foreheads, and that no man might buy or sell, save he that
had the mark, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his name_; that
is, the mark [Cross], or the name [Greek: LATEINOS], or the number thereof
[Greek: chxs], 666. All others were excommunicated.

When the seven Angels had poured out the seven vials of wrath, and _John_
had described them all in the present time, he is called up from the time
of the seventh vial to the time of the sixth seal, to take a view of the
woman and her Beast, who were to reign in the times of the seventh seal. In
respect of the latter part of time of the sixth seal, then considered as
present, the Angel tells _John_: _The Beast that thou sawest, was and is
not, and shall ascend out of the abyss, and go into perdition_; that is, he
was in the reign of _Constans_ and _Magnentius_, until _Constantius_
conquered _Magnentius_, and re-united the _Western_ Empire to the
_Eastern_. He is not during the reunion, and he shall ascend out of the
abyss or sea at a following division of the Empire. The Angel tells him
further: _Here is the mind which hath wisdom: the seven heads are seven
mountains, on which the woman sitteth_; _Rome_ being built upon seven
hills, and thence called the seven-hilled city. _Also there are seven
Kings: five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come; and when
he cometh, he must continue a short space: and the Beast that was and is
not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and goeth into perdition_.
Five are fallen, the times of the five first seals being past; and one is,
the time of the sixth seal being considered as present; and another is not
yet come, and when he cometh, which will be at the opening of the seventh
seal, he must continue a short space: and the Beast that was and is not,
even he is the eighth, by means of the division of the _Roman_ Empire into
two collateral Empires; and is of the seven, being one half of the seventh,
and shall go into perdition. The words, _five are fallen, and one is, and
the other is not yet come_, are usually referred by interpreters to the
time of _John_ the Apostle, when the Prophecy was given: but it is to be
considered, that in this Prophecy many things are spoken of as present,
which were not present when the Prophecy was given, but which would be
present with respect to some future time, considered as present in the
visions. Thus where it is said upon pouring out the seventh vial of wrath,
that _great _Babylon_ came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the
cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath_; this relates not to the
time of _John_ the Apostle, but to the time of pouring out the seventh vial
of wrath. So where it is said, _Babylon is fallen, is fallen_; and _thrust
in thy sickle and reap, for the time is come for thee to reap_; and _the
time of the dead is come, that they should be judged_; and again, _I saw
the dead small and great stand before God_: these sayings relate not to the
days of _John_ the Apostle, but to the latter times considered as present
in the visions. In like manner the words, _five are fallen, and one is, and
the other is not yet come_, and _the Beast that was and is not, he is the
eighth_, are not to be referred to the age of _John_ the Apostle, but
relate to the time when the Beast was to be wounded to death with a sword,
and shew that this wound was to be given him in his sixth head: and without
this reference we are not told in what head the Beast was wounded. _And the
ten horns which thou sawest, are ten Kings, which have received no kingdom
as yet, but receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast. These have one
mind_, being all of the whore's religion, _and shall give their power and
strength unto the Beast. These shall make war with the Lamb_, at the
sounding of the seventh trumpet; _and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he
is Lord of Lords and King of Kings; and they that are with him are called
and chosen and faithful. And he saith unto me, the waters which thou sawest
where the whore sitteth, are peoples and multitudes and nations and
tongues_, composing her Beast. _And the ten horns which thou sawest upon
the Beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and
naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire_, at the end of the
1260 days. _For God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his will, and to
agree and give their kingdom unto the Beast, until the words of God shall
be fulfilled. And the woman which thou sawest, is that great city which
reigneth over the Kings of the earth_, or the great city of the _Latins_,
which reigneth over the ten Kings till the end of those days.

       *       *       *       *       *

_FINIS_.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Observations upon the Prophecies of
Daniel, and the Apocalypse of St. John, by Isaac Newton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OBSERVATIONS UPON THE ***

***** This file should be named 16878-8.txt or 16878-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/8/7/16878/

Produced by Greg Alethoup, Robert Shimmin, Keith Edkins
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, by 
Isaac Newton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica

Author: Isaac Newton

Release Date: March 2, 2009 [EBook #28233]

Language: Latin


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PHILOSOPHIAE NATURALIS ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's note: A few typographical errors have been corrected: they
are listed at the end of the text.

{Braces} are inserted by the Transcriber to clarify the meaning of maths
expressions. Overlining is the method of grouping used in the original and
is marked [=like this]. In Lib. I. Lemma XVIII. & XX. [r] is upright r
distinguished from italics, in Lemma XVIII. [s] is long-s distinguished
from short-s, and in Prop. XXII. [D] is small-caps distinguished from
normal font size.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHILOSOPHIÆ

NATURALIS

PRINCIPIA

MATHEMATICA

       *       *       *       *       *


Autore _IS. NEWTON_, _Trin. Coll. Cantab. Soc._ Matheseos
Professore _Lucasiano_, & Societatis Regalis Sodali.

       *       *       *       *       *


IMPRIMATUR.

S. PEPYS, _Reg. Soc._ PRÆSES.

_Julii 5. 1686._

       *       *       *       *       *


_LONDINI,_

Jussu _Societatis Regiæ_ ac Typis _Josephi Streater_. Prostat apud
plures Bibliopolas. _Anno_ MDCLXXXVII.

       *       *       *       *       *


ILLUSTRISSIMÆ

SOCIETATI REGALI

a Serenissimo

REGE CAROLO II.

AD

PHILOSOPHIAM PROMOVENDAM

FUNDATÆ,

ET AUSPICIIS

POTENTISSIMI MONARCHÆ

JACOBI II.

FLORENTI.

Tractatum hunc humillime _D.D.D._

_IS. NEWTON._

       *       *       *       *       *


PRÆFATIO

AD

LECTOREM.

_Cum Veteres _Mechanicam_ (uti Author est _Pappus_) in verum Naturalium
investigatione maximi fecerint, & recentiores, missis formis
substantialibus & qualitatibus occultis, Phænomena Naturæ ad leges
Mathematicas revocare aggressi sint: Visum est in hoc Tractatu _Mathesin_
excolere quatenus ea ad _Philosophiam_ spectat. _Mechanicam_ vero duplicem
Veteres constituerunt: _Rationalem_ quæ per Demonstrationes accurate
procedit, & _Practicam_. Ad practicam spectant Artes omnes Manuales, a
quibus utiq; _Mechanica_ nomen mutuata est. Cum autem Artifices parum
accurate operari soleant, fit ut _Mechanica_ omnis a _Geometria_ ita
distinguatur, ut quicquid accuratum sit ad _Geometriam_ referatur, quicquid
minus accuratum ad _Mechanicam_. Attamen errores non sunt Artis sed
Artificum. Qui minus accurate operatur, imperfectior est Mechanicus, & si
quis accuratissime operari posset, hic foret Mechanicus omnium
perfectissimus. Nam & Linearum rectarum & Circulorum descriptiones in
quibus _Geometria_ fundatur, ad _Mechanicam_ pertinent. Has lineas
describere _Geometria_ non docet sed postulat. Postulat enim ut Tyro easdem
accurate describere prius didicerit quam limen attingat _Geometriæ_; dein,
quomodo per has operationes Problemata solvantur, docet. Rectas & circulos
describere Problemata sunt sed non Geometrica. Ex _Mechanica_ postulatur
horum solutio, in _Geometria_ docetur solutorum usus. Ac gloriatur
_Geometria_ quod tam paucis principiis aliunde petitis tam multa præstet.
Fundatur igitur _Geometria_ in praxi Mechanica, & nihil aliud est quam
_Mechanicæ universalis_ pars illa quæ artem mensurandi accurate proponit ac
demonstrat. Cum autem artes Manuales in corporibus movendis præcipue
versentur, fit ut _Geometria_ ad magnitudinem, _Mechanica_ ad motum vulgo
reseratur. Quo sensu _Mechanica rationalis_ erit Scientia Motuum qui ex
viribus quibuscunq; resultant, & virium quæ ad motus quoscunq; requiruntur,
accurate proposita ac demonstrata. Pars hæc _Mechanicæ_ a Veteribus in
_Potentiis quinque_ ad artes manuales spectantibus exculta fuit, qui
Gravitatem (cum potentia manualis non sit) vix aliter quam in ponderibus
per potentias illas movendis considerarunt. Nos autem non Artibus sed
Philosophiæ consulentes, deq; potentiis non manualibus sed naturalibus
scribentes, ea maxime tractamus quæ ad Gravitatem, levitatem, vim
Elasticam, resistentiam Fluidorum & ejusmodi vires seu attractivas seu
impulsivas spectant: Et ea propter hæc nostra tanquam Philosophiæ principia
Mathematica proponimus. Omnis enim Philosophiæ difficultas in eo versari
videtur, ut a Phænomenis motuum investigemus vires Naturæ, deinde ab his
viribus demonstremus phænomena reliqua. Et hac spectant Propositiones
generales quas Libro primo & secundo pertractavimus. In Libro autem tertio
exemplum hujus rei proposuimus per explicationem Systematis mundani. Ibi
enim, ex phænomenis cælestibus, per Propositiones in Libris prioribus
Mathematice demonstratas, derivantur vires gravitatis quibus corpora ad
Solem & Planetas singulos tendunt. Deinde ex his viribus per Propositiones
etiam Mathematicas deducuntur motus Planetarum, Cometarum, Lunæ & Maris.
Utinam cætera Naturæ phænomena ex principiis Mechanicis eodem argumentandi
genere derivare liceret. Nam multa me movent ut nonnihil suspicer ea omnia
ex viribus quibusdam pendere posse, quibus corporum particulæ per causas
nondum cognitas vel in se mutuo impelluntur & secundum figuras regulares
cohærent, vel ab invicem fugantur & recedunt: quibus viribus ignotis,
Philosophi hactenus Naturam frustra tentarunt. Spero autem quod vel huic
Philosophandi modo, vel veriori alicui, Principia hic posita lucem aliquam
præbebunt._

_In his edendis, Vir acutissimus & in omni literarum genere eruditissimus
_Edmundus Halleius_ operam navavit, nec solum Typothetarum Sphalmata
correxit & Schemata incidi curavit, sed etiam Author fuit ut horum
editionem aggrederer. Quippe cum demonstratam a me figuram Orbium cælestium
impetraverat, rogare non destitit ut eadem cum _Societate Regali_
communicarem, Quæ deinde hortatibus & benignis suis auspiciis effecit ut de
eadem in lucem emittenda cogitare inciperem. At postquam Motuum Lunarium
inæqualitates aggressus essem, deinde etiam alia tentare cæpissem quæ ad
leges mensuras Gravitatis & aliarum virium, ad figuras a corporibus
secundum datas quascunque leges attractis describendas, ad motus corporum
plurium inter se, ad motus corporum in Mediis resistentibus, ad vires,
densitates & motus Mediorum, ad Orbes Cometarum & similia spectant,
editionem in aliud tempus differendam esse putavi, ut cætera rimarer & una
in publicum darem. Quæ ad motus Lunares spectant, (imperfecta cum sint,) in
Corollariis Propositionis _LXVI._ simul complexus sum, ne singula methodo
prolixiore quam pro rei dignitate proponere, & sigillatim demonstrare
tenerer, & seriem reliquarum Propositionum interrumpere. Nonnulla sero
inventa locis minus idoneis inserere malui, quam numerum Propositionum &
citationes mutare. Ut omnia candide legantur, & defectus, in materia tam
difficili non tam reprehendantur, quam novis Lectorum conatibus
investigentur, & benigne suppleantur, enixe rogo._

       *       *       *       *       *


IN

VIRI PRÆSTANTISSIMI

D. ISAACI NEWTONI

OPUS HOCCE

MATHEMATICO-PHYSICUM

_Sæculi Gentisque nostræ Decus egregium._

  En tibi norma Poli, & divæ libramina Molis,
  Computus atque Jovis; quas, dum primordia rerum
  Pangeret, omniparens Leges violare Creator
  Noluit, æternique operis fundamina fixit.
  Intima panduntur victi penetralia cæli,
  Nec latet extremos quæ Vis circumrotat Orbes.
  Sol solio residens ad se jubet omnia prono
  Tendere descensu, nec recto tramite currus
  Sidereos patitur vastum per inane moveri;
  Sed rapit immotis, se centro, singula Gyris.
  Jam patet horrificis quæ sit via flexa Cometis;
  Jam non miramur barbati Phænomena Astri.
  Discimus hinc tandem qua causa argentea Phoebe
  Passibus haud æquis graditur; cur subdita nulli
  Hactenus Astronomo numerorum fræna recuset:
  Cur remeant Nodi, curque Auges progrediuntur.
  Discimus & quantis refluum vaga Cynthia Pontum
  Viribus impellit, dum fractis fluctibus Ulvam
  Deserit, ac Nautis suspectas nudat arenas;
  Alternis vicibus suprema ad littora pulsans.
  Quæ toties animos veterum torsere Sophorum,
  Quæque Scholas frustra rauco certamine vexant
  Obvia conspicimus nubem pellente Mathesi.
  Jam dubios nulla caligine prægravat error
  Queis Superum penetrare domos atque ardua Coeli
  Scandere sublimis Genii concessit acumen.

  Surgite Mortales, terrenas mittite curas
  Atque hinc coeligenæ vires dignoscite Mentis
  A pecudum vita longe lateque remotæ.
  Qui scriptis jussit Tabulis compescere Cædes
  Furta & Adulteria, & perjuræ crimina Fraudis;
  Quive vagis populis circumdare moenibus Urbes
  Autor erat; Cererisve beavit munere gentes;
  Vel qui curarum lenimen pressit ab Uva;
  Vel qui Niliaca monstravit arundine pictos
  Consociare sonos, oculisque exponere Voces;
  Humanam sortem minus extulit; utpote pauca
  Respiciens miseræ solummodo commoda vitæ.
  Jam vero Superis convivæ admittimur, alti
  Jura poli tractare licet, jamque abdita coecæ
  Claustra patent Terræ rerumque immobilis ordo,
  Et quæ præteriti latuerunt sæcula mundi.

  Talia monstrantem mecum celebrate Camænis,
  Vos qui coelesti gaudetis nectare vesci,
  _NEWTONVM_ clausi reserantem scrinia Veri,
  _NEWTONVM_ Musis charum, cui pectore puro
  Phoebus adest, totoque incessit Numine mentem:
  Nec fas est propius Mortali attingere Divos.

                  _EDM. HALLEY._

       *       *       *       *       *


PHILOSOPHIÆ

NATURALIS

Principia

MATHEMATICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


Definitiones.

       *       *       *       *       *


Def. I.

_Quantitas Materiæ est mensura ejusdem orta ex illius Densitate &
Magnitudine conjunctim._

Aer duplo densior in duplo spatio quadruplus est. Idem intellige de Nive et
Pulveribus per compressionem vel liquefactionem condensatis. Et par est
ratio corporum omnium, quæ per causas quascunq; diversimode condensantur.
Medii interea, si quod fuerit, interstitia partium libere pervadentis, hic
nullam rationem habeo. Hanc autem quantitatem sub nomine corporis vel Massæ
in sequentibus passim intelligo. Innotescit ea per corporis cujusq; pondus.
Nam ponderi proportionalem esse reperi per experimenta pendulorum
accuratissime instituta, uti posthac docebitur.

Def. II.

_Quantitas motus est mensura ejusdem orta ex Velocitate et quantitate
Materiæ conjunctim._

Motus totius est summa motuum in partibus singulis, adeoq; in corpore duplo
majore æquali cum Velocitate duplus est, et dupla cum Velocitate
quadruplus.

Def. III.

_Materiæ vis insita est potentia resistendi, qua corpus unumquodq;, quantum
in se est, perseverat in statu suo vel quiescendi vel movendi uniformiter
in directum._

Hæc semper proportionalis est suo corpori, neq; differt quicquam ab inertia
Massæ, nisi in modo concipiendi. Per inertiam materiæ fit ut corpus omne de
statu suo vel quiescendi vel movendi difficulter deturbetur. Unde etiam vis
insita nomine significantissimo vis inertiæ dici possit. Exercet vero
corpus hanc vim solummodo in mutatione status sui per vim aliam in se
impressam facta, estq; exercitium ejus sub diverso respectu et Resistentia
et Impetus: Resistentia quatenus corpus ad conservandum statum suum
reluctatur vi impressæ; Impetus quatenus corpus idem, vi resistentis
obstaculi difficulter cedendo, conatur statum ejus mutare. Vulgus
Resistentiam quiescentibus et Impetum moventibus tribuit; sed motus et
quies, uti vulgo concipiuntur, respectu solo distinguuntur ab invicem, neq;
semper vere quiescunt quæ vulgo tanquam quiescentia spectantur.

Def. IV.

_Vis impressa est actio in corpus exercita, ad mutandum ejus statum vel
quiescendi vel movendi uniformiter in directum._

Consistit hæc vis in actione sola, neq; post actionem permanet in corpore.
Perseverat enim corpus in statu omni novo per solam vim inertiæ. Est autem
vis impressa diversarum originum, ut ex ictu, ex pressione, ex vi
centripeta.

Def. V.

_Vis centripeta est qua corpus versus punctum aliquod tanquam ad centrum
trahitur, impellitur, vel utcunq; tendit._

Hujus generis est gravitas, qua corpus tendit ad centrum Terræ: Vis
magnetica, qua ferrum petit centrum Magnetis, et vis illa, quæcunq; sit,
qua Planetæ perpetuo retrahuntur a motibus rectilineis, et in lineis curvis
revolvi coguntur. Est autem vis centripetæ quantitas trium generum,
absoluta, acceleratrix et motrix.

Def. VI.

_Vis centripetæ quantitas absoluta est mensura ejusdem major vel minor pro
efficacia causæ eam propagantis a centro per regiones in circuitu._

Uti virtus Magnetica major in uno magnete, minor in alio.

Def. VII.

_Vis centripetæ quantitas acceleratrix est ipsius mensura Velocitati
proportionalis, quam dato tempore generat._

Uti Virtus Magnetis ejusdem major in minori Distantia, minor in majori: vel
vis gravitans major in Vallibus, minor in cacuminibus præaltorum montium
(ut experimento pendulorum constat) atq; adhuc minor (ut posthac patebit)
in majoribus distantiis a Terra; in æqualibus autem distantiis eadem undiq;
propterea quod corpora omnia cadentia (gravia an levia, magna an parva)
sublata Aeris resistentia, æqualiter accelerat.

Def. VIII.

_Vis centripetæ quantitas motrix est ipsius mensura proportionalis motui,
quem dato tempore generat._

Uti pondus majus in majori corpore, minus in minore; inq; corpore eodem
majus prope terram, minus in cælis. Hæc vis est corporis totius
centripetentia seu propensio in centrum & (ut ita dicam) pondus, &
innotescit semper per vim ipsi contrariam & æqualem, qua descensus corporis
impediri potest.

Hasce virium quantitates brevitatis gratia nominare licet vires absolutas,
acceleratrices & motrices, & distinctionis gratia referre ad corpora, ad
corporum loca, & ad centrum virium: Nimirum vim motricem ad corpus, tanquam
conatum & propensionem totius in centrum, ex propensionibus omnium partium
compositum; & vim acceleratricem ad locum corporis, tanquam efficaciam
quandam, de centro per loca singula in circuitu diffusam, ad movenda
corpora quæ in ipsis sunt; vim autem absolutam ad centrum, tanquam causa
aliqua præditum, sine qua vires motrices non propagantur per regiones in
circuitu; sive causa illa sit corpus aliquod centrale (quale est Magnes in
centro vis Magneticæ vel Terra in centro vis gravitantis) sive alia aliqua
quæ non apparet. Mathematicus saltem est hic conceptus. Nam virium causas &
sedes physicas jam non expendo.

Est igitur vis acceleratrix ad vim motricem ut celeritas ad motum. Oritur
enim quantitas motus ex celeritate ducta in quantitatem Materiæ, & vis
motrix ex vi acceleratrice ducta in quantitatem ejusdem materiæ. Nam summa
actionum vis acceleratricis in singulas corporis particulas est vis motrix
totius. Unde juxta Superficiem Terræ, ubi gravitas acceleratrix seu vis
gravitans in corporibus universis eadem est, gravitas motrix seu pondus est
ut corpus: at si in regiones ascendatur ubi gravitas acceleratrix fit
minor, pondus pariter minuetur, eritq; semper ut corpus in gravitatem
acceleratricem ductum. Sic in regionibus ubi gravitas acceleratrix duplo
minor est, pondus corporis duplo vel triplo minoris erit quadruplo vel
sextuplo minus.

Porro attractiones et impulsus eodem sensu acceleratrices & motrices
nomino. Voces autem attractionis, impulsus vel propensionis cujuscunq; in
centrum, indifferenter et pro se mutuo promiscue usurpo, has vires non
physice sed Mathematice tantum considerando. Unde caveat lector ne per
hujusmodi voces cogitet me speciem vel modum actionis causamve aut rationem
physicam alicubi definire, vel centris (quæ sunt puncta Mathematica) vires
vere et physice tribuere, si forte aut centra trahere, aut vires centrorum
esse dixero.

_Scholium._

Hactenus voces minus notas, quo in sensu in sequentibus accipiendæ sunt,
explicare visum est. Nam tempus, spatium, locum et motum ut omnibus
notissima non definio. Dicam tamen quod vulgus quantitates hasce non aliter
quam ex relatione ad sensibilia concipit. Et inde oriuntur præjudicia
quædam, quibus tollendis convenit easdem in absolutas & relativas, veras &
apparentes, Mathematicas et vulgares distingui.

I. Tempus absolutum verum & Mathematicum, in se & natura sua absq;
relatione ad externum quodvis, æquabiliter fluit, alioq; nomine dicitur
Duratio; relativum apparens & vulgare est sensibilis & externa quævis
Durationis per motum mensura, (seu accurata seu inæquabilis) qua vulgus
vice veri temporis utitur; ut Hora, Dies, Mensis, Annus.

II. Spatium absolutum natura sua absq; relatione ad externum quodvis semper
manet similare & immobile; relativum est spatii hujus mensura seu dimensio
quælibet mobilis, quæ a sensibus nostris per situm suum ad corpora
definitur, & a vulgo pro spatio immobili usurpatur: uti dimensio spatii
subterranei, aerei vel cælestis definita per situm suum ad Terram. Idem
sunt spatium absolutum & relativum, specie & magnitudine, sed non permanent
idem semper numero. Nam si Terra, verbi gratia, movetur, spatium Aeris
nostri quod relative & respectu Terræ semper manet idem, nunc erit una pars
spatii absoluti in quam Aer transit, nunc alia pars ejus, & sic absolute
mutabitur perpetuo.

III. Locus est pars spatii quam corpus occupat, estq; pro ratione spatii
vel absolutus vel relativus. Partem dico spatii, non situm corporis vel
superficiem ambientem. Nam solidorum æqualium æquales semper sunt loci;
Superficies autem ob dissimilitudinem figurarum ut plurimum inæquales sunt;
situs vero proprie loquendo quantitatem non habent, neq; tam sunt loca quam
affectiones locorum. Motus totius idem est cum summa motuum partium, hoc
est, translatio totius de ipsius loco eadem cum summa translationum partium
de locis suis, adeoq; locus totius idem cum summa locorum partium, &
propterea internus & in corpore toto.

IV. Motus absolutus est translatio corporis de loco absoluto in locum
absolutum, relativus de relativo in relativum. Sic in Navi quæ velis passis
fertur, relativus corporis locus est navis regio illa in qua corpus
versatur, seu cavitatis totius pars illa quam corpus implet, quæq; adeo
movetur una cum Navi; & Quies relativa est permansio corporis in eadem illa
navis regione vel parte cavitatis. At Quies vera est permansio corporis in
eadem parte spatii illius immoti in qua Navis ipsa una cum cavitate sua &
contentis universis movetur. Unde si Terra vere quiescit, corpus quod
relative quiescit in Navi, movebitur vere et absolute ea cum Velocitate qua
Navis movetur in Terra. Sin Terra etiam movetur, orietur verus et absolutus
corporis motus partim ex Terræ motu vero in spatio immoto, partim ex Navis
motu relativo in Terra; et si corpus etiam movetur relative in Navi,
orietur verus ejus motus partim ex vero motu Terræ in spatio immoto, partim
ex relativis motibus tum Navis in Terra, tum corporis in Navi, et ex his
motibus relativis orietur corporis motus relativus in Terra. Ut si Terræ
pars illa ubi Navis versatur moveatur vere in Orientem, cum Velocitate
partium 10010, et velis ventoq; feratur Navis in Occidentem cum Velocitate
partium decem, Nauta autem ambulet in Navi Orientem versus cum Velocitatis
parte una, movebitur Nauta vere et absolute in spatio immoto cum
Velocitatis partibus 10001 in Orientem, et relative in Terra Occidentem
versus cum Velocitatis partibus novem.

Tempus absolutum a relativo distinguitur in Astronomia per Æquationem
Temporis vulgi. Inæquales enim sunt dies Naturales, qui vulgo tanquam
æquales pro Mensura Temporis habentur. Hanc inæqualitatem corrigunt
Astronomi ut ex veriore Tempore mensurent motus cælestes. Possibile est ut
nullus sit motus æquabilis quo Tempus accurate mensuretur. Accelerari &
retardari possunt motus omnes, sed fluxus Temporis absoluti mutari nequit.
Eadem est duratio seu perseverantia existentiæ rerum, sive motus sint
celeres, sive tardi, sive nulli; proinde hæc a mensuris suis sensibilibus
merito distinguitur, & ex ijsdem colligitur per Æquationem Astronomicam.
Hujus autem æquationis in determinandis Phænomenis necessitas, tum per
experimentum Horologii oscillatorii, tum etiam per Eclipses Satellitum
Jovis evincitur.

Ut partium Temporis ordo est immutabilis, sic etiam ordo partium Spatii.
Moveantur hæ de locis suis, & movebuntur (ut ita dicam) de seipsis. Nam
Tempora & Spatia sunt sui ipsorum & rerum omnium quasi loca. In Tempore
quoad ordinem successionis; in Spatio quoad ordinem situs locantur
universa. De illorum Essentia est ut sint loca, & loca primaria moveri
absurdum est. Hæc sunt igitur absoluta loca, & solæ translationes de his
locis sunt absoluti motus.

Verum quoniam hæ spatii partes videri nequeunt, & ab invicem per sensus
nostros distingui, earum vice adhibemus mensuras sensibiles. Ex
positionibus enim & distantiis rerum a corpore aliquo, quod spectamus ut
immobile, definimus loca universa; deinde etiam & omnes motus æstimamus cum
respectu ad prædicta loca, quatenus corpora ab iisdem transferri
concipimus. Sic vice locorum & motuum absolutorum relativis utimur, nec
incommode in rebus humanis: in Philosophicis autem abstrahendum est a
sensibus. Fieri etenim potest ut nullum revera quiescat corpus, ad quod
loca motusq; referantur.

Distinguuntur autem Quies & Motus absoluti & relativi ab invicem per eorum
proprietates, causas & effectus. Quietis proprietas est, quod corpora vere
quiescentia quiescunt inter se. Ideoq; cum possibile sit ut corpus aliquod
in regionibus fixarum, aut longe ultra, quiescat absolute; sciri autem non
possit ex situ corporum ad invicem in regionibus nostris, utrum horum
aliquod ad longinquum illud datam positionem servet, quies vera ex horum
situ inter se definiri nequit.

Motus proprietas est, quod partes quæ datas servant positiones ad tota,
participant motus eorundem totorum. Nam gyrantium partes omnes conantur
recedere de axe motus, et progredientium impetus oritur ex conjuncto impetu
partium singularum. Igitur motis corporibus ambientibus, moventur quæ in
ambientibus relative quiescunt. Et propterea motus verus et absolutus
definiri nequit per translationem e vicinia corporum, quæ tanquam
quiescentia spectantur. Debent corpora externa non solum tanquam
quiescentia spectari, sed etiam vere quiescere. Alioquin inclusa omnia,
præter translationem e vicinia ambientium, participabunt etiam ambientium
motus veros, et sublata illa translatione non vere quiescent, sed tanquam
quiescentia solummodo spectabuntur; sunt enim ambientia ad inclusa ut
totius pars exterior ad partem interiorem, vel ut cortex ad nucleum. Moto
autem cortice, nucleus etiam, absq; translatione de vicinia corticis, ceu
pars totius, movetur.

Præcedenti proprietati affinis est, quod moto loco movetur una locatum,
adeoq; corpus, quod de loco moto movetur, participat etiam loci sui motum.
Igitur motus omnes, qui de locis motis fiunt, sunt partes solummodo motuum
integrorum et absolutorum, et motus omnis integer componitur ex motu
corporis de loco suo primo, et motu loci hujus de loco suo, et sic
deinceps, usq; dum perveniatur ad locum immotum, ut in exemplo Nautæ supra
memorato. Unde motus integri et absoluti non nisi per loca immota definiri
possunt, et propterea hos ad loca immota, relativos ad mobilia supra
retuli: Loca autem immota non sunt, nisi quæ omnia ab infinito in infinitum
datas servant positiones ad invicem, atq; adeo semper manent immota,
spatiumq; constituunt quod immobile appello.

Causæ, quibus motus veri et relativi distinguuntur ab invicem, sunt vires
in corpora impressæ ad motum generandum. Motus verus nec generatur nec
mutatur nisi per vires in ipsum corpus motum impressas: at motus relativus
generari et mutari potest absq; viribus impressis in hoc corpus. Sufficit
enim ut imprimantur in alia solum corpora ad quæ fit relatio, ut ijs
cedentibus mutetur relatio illa in qua hujus quies vel motus relativus
consistit. Rursus motus verus a viribus in corpus motum impressis semper
mutatur, at motus relativus ab his viribus non mutatur necessario. Nam si
eædem vires in alia etiam corpora, ad quæ fit relatio, sic imprimantur ut
situs relativus conservetur, conservabitur relatio in qua motus relativus
consistit. Mutari igitur potest motus omnis relativus ubi verus
conservatur, et conservari ubi verus mutatur; et propterea motus verus in
ejusmodi relationibus minime consistit.

Effectus quibus motus absoluti et relativi distinguuntur ab invicem, sunt
vires recedendi ab axe motus circularis. Nam in motu circulari nude
relativo hæ vires nullæ sunt, in vero autem et absoluto majores vel minores
pro quantitate motus. Si pendeat situla a filo prælongo, agaturq; perpetuo
in orbem donec filum a contorsione admodum rigescat, dein impleatur aqua,
et una cum aqua quiescat; tum vi aliqua subitanea agatur motu contrario in
orbem, et filo se relaxante, diutius perseveret in hoc motu: superficies
aquæ sub initio plana erit, quemadmodum ante motum vasis, at postquam, vi
in aquam paulatim impressa, effecit vas, ut hæc quoq; sensibiliter revolvi
incipiat, recedet ipsa paulatim e medio, ascendetq; ad latera vasis,
figuram concavam induens, (ut ipse expertus sum) et incitatiore semper motu
ascendet magis & magis, donec revolutiones in æqualibus cum vase temporibus
peragendo, quiescat in eodem relative. Indicat hic ascensus conatum
recedendi ab axe motus, & per talem conatum & innotescit & mensuratur motus
aquæ circularis verus & absolutus, motuiq; relativo hic omnino contrarius.
Initio ubi maximus erat aquæ motus relativus in vase, motus ille nullum
excitabat conatum recedendi ab axe: Aqua non petebat circumferentiam
ascendendo ad latera vasis, sed plana manebat, & propterea motus illius
circularis verus nondum inceperat. Postea vero ut aquæ motus relativus
decrevit, ascensus ejus ad latera vasis indicabat conatum recedendi ab axe,
atq; hic conatus monstrabat motum illius circularem verum perpetuo
crescentem, ac tandem maximum factum ubi aqua quiescebat in vase relative.
Igitur conatus iste non pendet a translatione aquæ respectu corporum
ambientium, & propterea motus circularis verus per tales translationes
definiri nequit. Unicus est corporis cujusq; revolventis motus vere
circularis, conatui unico tanquam proprio & adæquato effectui respondens;
motus autem relativi pro varijs relationibus ad externa innumeri sunt, &
relationum instar, effectibus veris omnino destituuntur, nisi quatenus de
vero illo & unico motu participant. Unde & in Systemate eorum qui Cælos
nostros infra Cælos fixarum in orbem revolvi volunt, & Planetas secum
deferre; Planetæ & singulæ Cælorum partes, qui relative quidem in Cælis
suis proximis quiescunt, moventur vere. Mutant enim positiones suas ad
invicem (secus quam fit in vere quiescentibus) unaq; cum cælis delati
participant eorum motus, & ut partes revolventium totorum, ab eorum axibus
recedere conantur.

Igitur quantitates relativæ non sunt eæ ipsæ quantitates quarum nomina præ
se ferunt, sed earum mensuræ illæ sensibiles (veræ an errantes) quibus
vulgus loco mensuratarum utitur. At si ex usu definiendæ sunt verborum
significationes; per nomina illa Temporis, Spatij, Loci & Motus proprie
intelligendæ erunt hæ mensuræ; & sermo erit insolens & pure Mathematicus si
quantitates mensuratæ hic subintelligantur. Proinde vim inferunt Sacris
literis qui voces hasce de quantitatibus mensuratis ibi interpretantur.
Neq; minus contaminant Mathesin & Philosophiam qui quantitates veras cum
ipsarum relationibus & vulgaribus mensuris confundunt.

Motus quidem veros corporum singulorum cognoscere, & ab apparentibus actu
discriminare, difficillimum est; propterea quod partes spatij illius
immobilis in quo corpora vere moventur, non incurrunt in sensus. Causa
tamen non est prorsus desperata. Nam suppetunt argumenta partim ex motibus
apparentibus, qui sunt motuum verorum differentiæ, partim ex viribus quæ
sunt motuum verorum causæ & effectus. Ut si globi duo ad datam ab invicem
distantiam filo intercedente connexi, revolverentur circa commune
gravitatis centrum; innotesceret ex tensione fili conatus globorum
recedendi ab axe motus, & inde quantitas motus circularis computari posset.
Deinde si vires quælibet æquales in alternas globorum facies ad motum
circularem augendum vel minuendum simul imprimerentur, innotesceret ex
aucta vel diminuta fili tensione augmentum vel decrementum motus; & inde
tandem inveniri possent facies globorum in quas vires imprimi deberent, ut
motus maxime augeretur, id est facies posticæ, sive quæ in motu circulari
sequuntur. Cognitis autem faciebus quæ sequuntur & faciebus oppositis quæ
præcedunt, cognosceretur determinatio motus. In hunc modum inveniri posset
& quantitas & determinatio motus hujus circularis in vacuo quovis immenso,
ubi nihil extaret externum & sensibile, quocum globi conferri possent. Si
jam constituerentur in spatio illo corpora aliqua longinqua datam inter se
positionem servantia, qualia sunt stellæ fixæ in regionibus nostris: sciri
quidem non posset ex relativa globorum translatione inter corpora, utrum
his an illis tribuendus esset motus. At si attenderetur ad filum &
inveniretur tensionem ejus illam ipsam esse quam motus globorum requireret;
concludere liceret motum esse globorum, & tum demum ex translatione
globorum inter corpora, determinationem hujus motus colligere. Motus autem
veros ex eorum causis, effectibus & apparentibus differentijs colligere, &
contra, ex motibus seu veris seu apparentibus, eorum causas & effectus,
docebitur fusius in sequentibus. Hunc enim in finem Tractatum sequentem
composui.

       *       *       *       *       *


AXIOMATA

SIVE

LEGES MOTUS

       *       *       *       *       *


Lex. I.

    _Corpus omne perseverare in statu suo quiescendi vel movendi
    uniformiter in directum, nisi quatenus a viribus impressis cogitur
    statum illum mutare._

Projectilia perseverant in motibus suis nisi quatenus a resistentia aeris
retardantur & vi gravitatis impelluntur deorsum. Trochus, cujus partes
cohærendo perpetuo retrahunt sese a motibus rectilineis, non cessat rotari
nisi quatenus ab aere retardatur. Majora autem Planetarum & Cometarum
corpora motus suos & progressivos & circulares in spatiis minus
resistentibus factos conservant diutius.

Lex. II.

    _Mutationem motus proportionalem esse vi motrici impressæ, & fieri
    secundum lineam rectam qua vis illa imprimitur._

Si vis aliqua motum quemvis generet, dupla duplum, tripla triplum
generabit, sive simul & semel, sive gradatim & successive impressa suerit.
Et hic motus quoniam in eandem semper plagam cum vi generatrice
determinatur, si corpus antea movebatur, motui ejus vel conspiranti
additur, vel contrario subducitur, vel obliquo oblique adjicitur, & cum eo
secundum utriusq; determinationem componitur.

Lex. III.

    _Actioni contrariam semper & æqualem esse reactionem: sive corporum
    duorum actiones in se mutuo semper esse æquales & in partes contrarias
    dirigi._

Quicquid premit vel trahit alterum, tantundem ab eo premitur vel trahitur.
Siquis lapidem digito premit, premitur & hujus digitus a lapide. Si equus
lapidem funi allegatum trahit, retrahetur etiam & equus æqualiter in
lapidem: nam funis utrinq; distentus eodem relaxandi se conatu urgebit
Equum versus lapidem, ac lapidem versus equum, tantumq; impediet progressum
unius quantum promovet progressum alterius. Si corpus aliquod in corpus
aliud impingens, motum ejus vi sua quomodocunq; mutaverit, idem quoque
vicissim in motu proprio eandem mutationem in partem contrariam vi alterius
(ob æqualitatem pressionis mutuæ) subibit. His actionibus æquales fiunt
mutationes non velocitatum sed motuum, (scilicet in corporibus non aliunde
impeditis:) Mutationes enim velocitatum, in contrarias itidem partes factæ,
quia motus æqualiter mutantur, sunt corporibus reciproce proportionales.

Corol. I.

[Illustration]

    _Corpus viribus conjunctis diagonalem parallelogrammi eodem tempore
    describere, quo latera separatis._

Si corpus dato tempore, vi sola M, ferretur ab A ad B, & vi sola N, ab A ad
C, compleatur parallelogrammum ABDC, & vi utraq; feretur id eodem tempore
ab A ad D. Nam quoniam vis N agit secundum lineam AC ipsi BD parallelam,
hæc vis nihil mutabit velocitatem accedendi ad lineam illam BD a vi altera
genitam. Accedet igitur corpus eodem tempore ad lineam BD sive vis N
imprimatur, sive non, atq; adeo in fine illius temporis reperietur alicubi
in linea illa BD. Eodem argumento in fine temporis ejusdem reperietur
alicubi in linea CD, & idcirco in utriusq; lineæ concursu D reperiri
necesse est.

Corol. II.

    _Et hinc patet compositio vis directæ AD ex viribus quibusvis obliquis
    AB & BD, & vicissim resolutio vis cujusvis directæ AD in obliquas
    quascunq; AB & BD. Quæ quidem Compositio & resolutio abunde confirmatur
    ex Mechanica._

[Illustration]

Ut si de rotæ alicujus centro O exeuntes radij inæquales OM, ON filis MA,
NP sustineant pondera A & P, & quærantur vires ponderum ad movendam rotam:
per centrum O agatur recta KOL filis perpendiculariter occurrens in K & L,
centroq; O & intervallorum OK, OL majore OL describatur circulus occurrens
filo MA in D: & actæ rectæ OD parallela sit AC & perpendicularis DC.
Quoniam nihil refert utrum filorum puncta K, L, D affixa sint vel non
affixa ad planum rotæ, pondera idem valebunt ac si suspenderentur a punctis
K & L vel D & L. Ponderis autem A exponatur vis tota per lineam AD, & hæc
resolvetur in vires AC, CD, quarum AC trahendo radium OD directe a centro
nihil valet ad movendam rotam; vis autem altera DC, trahendo radium DO
perpendiculariter, idem valet ac si perpendiculariter traheret radium OL
ipsi OD æqualem; hoc est idem atq; pondus P, quod sit ad pondus A ut vis DC
ad vim DA, id est (ob similia triangula ADC, DOK,) ut OK ad OD seu OL.
Pondera igitur A & P, quæ sunt reciproce ut radii in directum positi OK &
OL, idem pollebunt & sic consistent in æquilibrio: (quæ est proprietas
notissima Libræ, Vectis & Axis in Peritrochio:) sin pondus alterutrum sit
majus quam in hac ratione, erit vis ejus ad movendam rotam tanto major.

Quod si pondus p ponderi P æquale partim suspendatur silo Np, partim
incumbat plano obliquo pG: agantur pH, NH, prior horizonti, posterior plano
pG perpendicularis; & si vis ponderis p deorsum tendens, exponatur per
lineam pH, resolvi potest hæc in vires pN, HN. Si filo pN perpendiculare
esset planum aliquod pQ secans planum alterum pG in linea ad horizontem
parallela; & pondus p his planis pQ, pG solummodo incumberet; urgeret illud
hæc plana viribus pN, HN perpendiculariter, nimirum planum pQ vi pN &
planum pG vi HN. Ideoque si tollatur planum pQ ut pondus tendat filum,
quoniam filum sustinendo pondus, jam vicem præstat plani sublati, tendetur
illud eadem vi pN, qua planum antea urgebatur. Unde tensio fili hujus
obliqui erit ad tensionem fili alterius perpendicularis PN, ut pN ad pH.
Ideoq; si pondus p sit ad pondus A in ratione quæ componitur ex ratione
reciproca minimarum distantiarum filorum suorum AM, pN a centro rotæ, &
ratione directa pH ad pN; pondera idem valebunt ad rotam movendam, atq;
adeo se mutuo sustinebunt, ut quilibet experiri potest.

Pondus autem p planis illis duobus obliquis incumbens, rationem habet cunei
inter corporis fissi facies internas: & inde vires cunei & mallei
innotescunt: utpote cum vis qua pondus p urget planum pQ sit ad vim, qua
idem vel gravitate sua vel ictu mallei impellitur secundum lineam pH in
plano, ut pN ad pH; atq; ad vim qua urget planum alterum pG ut pN ad NH.
Sed & vis Cochleæ per similem virium divisionem colligitur; quippe quæ
cuneus est a vecte impulsus. Usus igitur Corollarij hujus latissime patet,
& late patendo veritatem ejus evincit, cum pendeat ex jam dictis Mechanica
tota ab Authoribus diversimode demonstrata. Ex hisce enim facile derivantur
vires Machinarum, quæ ex Rotis, Tympanis, Trochleis, Vectibus, radijs
volubilibus, nervis tensis & ponderibus directe vel oblique ascendentibus,
cæterisq; potentijs Mechanicis componi solent, ut & vires Nervorum ad
animalium ossa movenda.

Corol. III.

    _Quantitas motus quæ colligitur capiendo summam motuum factorum ad
    eandem partem, & differentiam factorum ad contrarias, non mutatur ab
    actione corporum inter se._

Etenim actio eiq; contraria reactio æquales sunt per Legem 3, adeoq; per
legem 2, æquales in motibus efficiunt mutationes versus contrarias partes.
Ergo si motus fiunt ad eandem partem, quicquid additur motui corporis
fugientis subducetur motui corporis insequentis sic, ut summa maneat eadem
quæ prius. Sin corpora obviam eant, æqualis erit subductio de motu
utriusq;, adeoq; differentia motuum factorum in contrarias partes manebit
eadem.

Ut si corpus sphæricum A sit triplo majus corpore sphærico B, habeatq; duas
velocitatis partes, et B sequatur in eadem recta cum velocitatis partibus
decem, adeoq; motus ipsius A sit ad motum ipsius B ut sex ad decem;
ponantur motus illis esse partium sex & decem, & summa erit partium
sexdecim. In corporum igitur concursu, si corpus A lucretur motus partes
tres vel quatuor vel quinq; corpus B amittet partes totidem, adeoq; perget
corpus A post reflexionem cum partibus novem vel decem vel undecim; & B cum
partibus septem vel sex vel quinq; existente semper summa partium sexdecim
ut prius. Sin corpus A lucretur partes novem vel decem vel undecim vel
duodecim, adeoq; progrediatur post concursum cum partibus quindecim vel
sexdecim vel septendecim vel octodecim; corpus B amittendo, tot partes quot
A lucratur, vel progredietur cum una parte, amissis partibus novem, vel
quiescet amisso motu suo progressivo partium decem, vel regredietur cum una
parte amisso motu suo & (ut ita dicam) una parte amplius, vel regredietur
cum partibus duabus ob detractum motum progressivum partium duodecim. Atq;
ita summæ motuum conspirantium 15 + 1 vel 16 + 0, differentiæ contrariorum
17 - 1 & 18 - 2 semper erunt partium sexdecim ut ante concursum &
reflexionem. Cognitis autem motibus quibuscum corpora post reflexionem
pergent, invenietur cujusq; velocitas ponendo eam esse ad velocitatem ante
reflexionem ut motus post ad motum ante. Ut in casu ultimo, ubi corporis A
motus erat partium sex ante reflexionem; partium octodecim postea, &
velocitas partium duarum ante reflexionem; invenietur ejus velocitas
partium sex post reflexionem, dicendo, ut motus partes sex ante reflexionem
ad motus partes octodecim postea, ita velocitatis partes duæ ante
reflexionem ad velocitatis partes sex postea.

Quod si corpora vel non Sphærica vel diversis in rectis moventia incidant
in se mutuo oblique, & requirantur eorum motus post reflexionem,
cognoscendus est situs plani a quo corpora concurrentia tanguntur in puncto
concursus; dein corporis utriusq; motus (per Corol. 2.) distinguendus est
in duos, unum huic plano perpendicularem, alterum eidem parallelum: motus
autem paralleli, propterea quod corpora agant in se invicem secundum lineam
huic plano perpendicularem, retinendi sunt iidem post reflexionem atq;
antea, & motibus perpendicularibus mutationes æquales in partes contrarias
tribuendæ sunt sic, ut summa conspirantium & differentia contrariorum
maneat eadem quæ prius. Ex hujusmodi reflexionibus oriri etiam solent motus
circulares corporum circa centra propria. Sed hos casus in sequentibus non
considero, & nimis longum esset omnia huc spectantia demonstrare.

Corol. IIII.

    _Commune gravitatis centrum ab actionibus corporum inter se non mutat
    statum suum vel motus vel quietis, & propterea corporum omnium in se
    mutuo agentium (exclusis actionibus & impedimentis externis) commune
    centrum gravitatis vel quiescit vel movetur uniformiter in directum._

Nam si puncta duo progrediantur uniformi cum motu in lineis rectis &
distantia eorum dividatur in ratione data, punctum dividens vel quiescet
vel progredietur uniformiter in linea recta, Hoc postea in Lemmate xxiii
demonstratur in plano, & eadem ratione demonstrari potest in loco solido.
Ergo si corpora quotcunq; moventur uniformiter in lineis rectis, commune
centrum gravitatis duorum quorumvis, vel quiescit vel progreditur
uniformiter in linea recta, propterea quod linea horum corporum centra in
rectis uniformiter progredientia jungens, dividitur ab hoc centro communi
in ratione data: similiter & commune centrum horum duorum & tertii cujusvis
vel quiescit vel progreditur uniformiter in linea recta, propterea quod ab
eo dividitur distantia centri communis corporum duorum & centri corporis
tertii in data ratione. Eodem modo & commune centrum horum trium & quarti
cujusvis vel quiescit vel progreditur uniformiter in linea recta, propterea
quod ab eo dividitur distantia inter centrum commune trium & centrum quarti
in data ratione, & sic in infinitum. Igitur in systemate corporum quæ
actionibus in se invicem, alijsq; omnibus in se extrinsecus impressis,
omnino vacant, adeoq; moventur singula uniformiter in rectis singulis,
commune omnium centrum gravitatis vel quiescit vel movetur uniformiter in
directum.

Porro in systemate duorum corporum in se invicem agentium, cum distantiæ
centrorum utriusq; a communi gravitatis centro sint reciproce ut corpora,
erunt motus relativi corporum eorundem vel accedendi ad centrum illud vel
ab eodem recedendi, æquales inter se. Proinde centrum illud a motuum
æqualibus mutationibus in partes contrarias factis, atq; adeo ab actionibus
horum corporum inter se, nec promovetur nec retardatur nec mutationem
patitur in statu suo quoad motum vel quietem. In systemate autem corporum
plurium, quoniam duorum quorumvis in se mutuo agentium commune gravitatis
centrum ob actionem illam nullatenus mutat statum suum; & reliquorum,
quibuscum actio illa non intercedit, commune gravitatis centrum nihil inde
patitur; distantia autem horum duorum centrorum dividitur, a communi
corporum omnium centro, in partes summis totalibus corporum, quorum sunt
centra, reciproce proportionales, adeoq; centris illis duobus statum suum
movendi vel quiescendi servantibus, commune omnium centrum servat etiam
statum suum; manifestum est quod commune illud omnium centrum, ob actiones
binorum corporum inter se, nunquam mutat statum suum quoad motum & quietem.
In tali autem systemate actiones omnes corporum inter se, vel inter bina
sunt corpora, vel ab actionibus inter bina compositæ, & propterea communi
omnium centro mutationem in statu motus ejus vel Quietis nunquam inducunt.
Quare cum centrum illud ubi corpora non agunt in se invicem, vel quiescit,
vel in recta aliqua progreditur uniformiter, perget idem, non obstantibus
corporum actionibus inter se, vel semper quiescere, vel semper progredi
uniformiter in directum, nisi a viribus in systema extrinsecus impressis
deturbetur de hoc statu. Est igitur systematis corporum plurium Lex eadem
quæ corporis solitarii, quoad perseverantiam in statu motus vel quietis.
Motus enim progressivus seu corporis solitarii seu systematis corporum ex
motu centri gravitatis æstimari semper debet.

Corol. V.

    _Corporum dato spatio inclusorum ijdem sunt motus inter se, sive
    spatium illud quiescat, sive moveatur idem uniformiter in directum
    absq; motu circulari._

Nam differentiæ motuum tendentium ad eandem partem, & summæ tendentium ad
contrarias, eadem sunt sub initio in utroq; casu (ex hypothesi) & ex his
summis vel differentiis oriuntur congressus & impetus quibus corpora se
mutuo feriunt. Ergo per Legem 2 æquales erunt congressuum effectus in
utroq; casu, & propterea manebunt motus inter se in uno casu æquales
motibus inter se in altero. Idem comprobatur experimento luculento. Motus
omnes eodem modo se habent in Navi, sive ea quiescat, sive moveatur
uniformiter in directum.

Corol. VI.

    _Si corpora moveantur quomodocunq; inter se & a viribus
    acceleratricibus æqualibus secundum lineas parallelas urgeantur;
    pergent omnia eodem modo moveri inter se ac si viribus illis non essent
    incitata._

Nam vires illæ æqualiter (pro quantitatibus movendorum corporum) & secundum
lineas parallelas agendo, corpora omnia æqualiter (quoad velocitatem)
movebunt (per Legem 2.) adeoq; nunquam mutabunt positiones & motus eorum
inter se.

_Scholium_

[Illustration]

Hactenus principia tradidi a Mathematicis recepta & experientia multiplici
confirmata. Per leges duas primas & Corollaria duo prima adinvenit
_Galilæus_ descensum gravium esse in duplicata ratione temporis, & motum
projectilium fieri in Parabola, conspirante experientia, nisi quatenus
motus illi per aeris resistentiam aliquantulum retardantur. Ab ijsdem
Legibus & Corollariis pendent demonstrata de temporibus oscillantium
Pendulorum, suffragante Horologiorum experientia quotidiana. Ex his ijsdem
& Lege tertia _D. Christopherus Wrennus_ Eques auratus, _Johannes Wallisius
S.T.D._ & _D. Christianus Hugenius_, hujus ætatis Geometrarum facile
Principes, regulas congressuum & reflexionum duorum corporum seorsim
adinvenerunt, & eodem fere tempore cum _Societate Regia_ communicarunt,
inter se (quoad has leges) omnino conspirantes; Et primus quidem _D.
Wallisius_ dein _D. Wrennus_ & _D. Hugenius_ inventum prodidit. Sed &
veritas comprobata est a _D. Wrenno_ coram _Regia Societate_ per
experimentum Pendulorum, quod etiam _Clarissimus Mariottus_ Libro integro
exponere mox dignatus est. Verum ut hoc experimentum cum Theorijs ad
amussim congruat, habenda est ratio tum resistentiæ aeris, tum etiam vis
Elasticæ concurrentium corporum. Pendeant corpora A, B filis parallelis AC,
BD a centris C, D. His centris & intervallis describantur semicirculi EAF,
GBH radijs CA, DB bisecti. Trahatur corpus A ad arcus EAF punctum quodvis
R, & (subducto corpore B) demittatur inde, redeatq; post unam oscillationem
ad punctum V. Est RV retardatio ex resistentia aeris. Hujus RV fiat ST pars
quarta sita in medio, & hæc exhibebit retardationem in descensu ab S ad A
quam proxime. Restituatur corpus B in locum suum. Cadat corpus A de puncto
S, & velocitas ejus in loco reflexionis A, absq; errore sensibili, tanta
erit ac si in vacuo cecidisset de loco T. Exponatur igitur hæc velocitas
per chordam arcus TA. Nam velocitatem Penduli in puncto infimo esse ut
chorda arcus quem cadendo descripsit, Propositio est Geometris notissima.
Post reflexionem perveniat corpus A ad locum s, & corpus B ad locum k.
Tollatur corpus B & inveniatur locus v, a quo si corpus A demittatur & post
unam oscillationem redeat ad locum r, sit st pars quarta ipsius rv sita in
medio, & per chordam arcus tA exponatur velocitas quam corpus A proxime
post reflexionem habuit in loco A. Nam t erit locus ille verus & correctus
ad quem corpus A, sublata aeris resistentia, ascendere debuisset. Simili
methodo corrigendus erit locus k, ad quem corpus B ascendit, & inveniendus
locus l, ad quem corpus illud ascendere debuisset in vacuo. Hoc pacto
experiri licet omnia perinde ac si in vacuo constituti essemus. Tandem
ducendum erit corpus A in chordam arcus TA (quæ velocitatem ejus exhibet)
ut habeatur motus ejus in loco A proxime ante reflexionem, deinde in
chordam arcus tA ut habeatur motus ejus in loco A proxime post reflexionem.
Et sic corpus B ducendum erit in chordam arcus Bl, ut habeatur motus ejus
proxime post reflexionem. Et simili methodo ubi corpora duo simul
demittuntur de locis diversis, inveniendi sunt motus utriusq; tam ante,
quam post reflexionem; & tum demum conferendi sunt motus inter se &
colligendi effectus reflexionis. Hoc modo in Pendulis pedum decem rem
tentando, idq; in corporibus tam inæqualibus quam æqualibus, & faciendo ut
corpora de intervallis amplissimis, puta pedum octo, duodecim vel sexdecim
concurrerent, reperi semper sine errore trium digitorum in mensuris, ubi
corpora sibi mutuo directe occurrebant quod in partes contrarias mutatio
motus erat corpori utriq; illata, atq; adeo quod actio & reactio semper
erant æquales. Ut si corpus A incidebat in corpus B cum novem partibus
motus, & amissis septem partibus pergebat post reflexionem cum duabus,
corpus B resiliebat cum partibus istis septem. Si corpora obviam ibant, A
cum duodecim partibus & B cum sex & redibat A cum duabus, redibat B cum
octo, facta detractione partium quatuordecim utrinque. De motu ipsius A
subducantur partes duodecim & restabit nihil; subducantur aliæ partes duæ &
fiet motus duarum partium in plagam contrariam. & sic de motu corporis B
partium sex subducendo partes quatuordecim, fiunt partes octo in plagam
contrariam. Quod si corpora ibant ad eandem plagam, A velocius cum partibus
quatuordecim & B tardius cum partibus quinq; & post reflexionem pergebat A
cum quinq; partibus, pergebat B cum quatuordecim, facta translatione
partium novem de A in B. Et sic in reliquis. A congressu & collisione
corporum nunquam mutabatur quantitas motus quæ ex summa motuum
conspirantium & differentia contrariorum colligebatur. Namq; errorem digiti
unius & alterius in mensuris tribuerim difficultati peragendi singula satis
accurate. Difficile erat tum pendula simul demittere sic, ut corpora in se
mutuo impingerent in loco infimo AB, tum loca s, k, notare ad quæ corpora
ascendebant post concursum. Sed & in ipsis pilis inæqualis partium
densitas, & textura aliis de causis irregularis, errores inducebant.

Porro nequis objiciat Regulam ad quam probandam inventum est hoc
experimentum præsupponere corpora vel absolute dura esse, vel saltem
perfecte elastica, cujusmodi nulla reperiuntur in compositionibus
naturalibus; addo quod experimenta jam descripta succedunt in corporibus
mollibus æque ac in duris, nimirum a conditione duritiei neutiquam
pendentia. Nam si conditio illa in corporibus non perfecte duris tentanda
est, debebit solummodo reflexio minui in certa proportione pro quantitate
vis Elasticæ. In Theoria _Wrenni_ & _Hugenij_ corpora absolute dura redeunt
ab invicem cum velocitate congressus. Certius id affirmabitur de perfecte
Elasticis. In imperfecte Elasticis velocitas reditus minuenda est simul cum
vi Elastica; propterea quod vis illa, (nisi ubi partes corporum ex
congressu læduntur, vel extensionem aliqualem quasi sub malleo patiuntur,)
certa ac determinata sit (quantum sentio) faciatq; corpora redire ab
invicem cum velocitate relativa quæ sit ad relativam velocitatem concursus
in data ratione. Id in pilis ex lana arcte conglomerata & fortiter
constricta sic tentavi. Primum demittendo Pendula & mensurando reflexionem,
inveni quantitatem vis Elasticæ; deinde per hanc vim determinavi
reflexiones in aliis casibus concursuum, & respondebant experimenta.
Redibant semper pilæ ab invicem cum velocitate relativa, quæ esset ad
velocitatem relativam concursus ut 5 ad 9 circiter. Eadem fere cum
velocitate redibant pilæ ex chalybe: aliæ ex subere cum paulo minore. In
vitreis autem proportio erat 15 ad 16 circiter. Atq; hoc pacto Lex tertia
quoad ictus & reflexiones per Theoriam comprobata est, quæ cum experientia
plane congruit.

In attractionibus rem sic breviter ostendo. Corporibus duobus quibusvis A,
B se mutuo trahentibus, concipe obstaculum quodvis interponi quo congressus
eorum impediatur. Si corpus alterutrum A magis trahitur versus corpus
alterum B, quam illud alterum B in prius A, obstaculum magis urgebitur
pressione corporis A quam pressione corporis B; proindeq; non manebit in
æquilibrio. Prævalebit pressio fortior, facietq; systema corporum duorum &
obstaculi moveri in directum in partes versus B, motuq; in spatiis liberis
semper accelerato abire in infinitum. Quod est absurdum & Legi primæ
contrarium. Nam per Legem primam debebit systema perseverare in statu suo
quiescendi vel movendi uniformiter in directum, proindeq; corpora æqualiter
urgebunt obstaculum, & idcirco æqualiter trahentur in invicem. Tentavi hoc
in Magnete & ferro. Si hæc in vasculis propriis sese contingentibus seorsim
posita, in aqua stagnante juxta fluitent, neutrum propellet alterum, sed
æqualitate attractionis utrinq; sustinebunt conatus in se mutuos, ac tandem
in æquilibrio constituta quiescent.

Ut corpora in concursu & reflexione idem pollent, quorum velocitates sunt
reciproce ut vires insitæ: sic in movendis Instrumentis Mechanicis agentia
idem pollent & conatibus contrariis se mutuo sustinent, quorum velocitates
secundum determinationem virium æstimatæ, sunt reciproce ut vires. Sic
pondera æquipollent ad movenda brachia Libræ, quæ oscillante Libra, sunt
reciproce ut eorum velocitates sursum & deorsum: hoc est pondera, si recta
ascendunt & descendunt, æquipollent, quæ sunt reciproce ut punctorum a
quibus suspenduntur distantiæ ab axe Libræ; sin planis obliquis aliisve
admotis obstaculis impedita ascendunt vel descendunt oblique, æquipollent
quæ sunt ut ascensus & descensus quatenus facti secundum perpendiculum: id
adeo ob determinationem gravitatis deorsum. Similiter in Trochlea seu
Polyspasto vis manus funem directe trahentis, quæ sit ad pondus vel directe
vel oblique ascendens ut velocitas ascensus perpendicularis ad velocitatem
manus funem trahentis, sustinebit pondus. In horologiis & similibus
instrumentis, quæ ex rotulis commissus constructa sunt, vires contrariæ ad
motum rotularum promovendum & impediendum si sunt reciproce ut velocitates
partium rotularum in quas imprimuntur, sustinebunt se mutuo. Vis Cochleæ ad
premendum corpus est ad vim manus manubrium circumagentis, ut circularis
velocitas Manubrii ea in parte ubi a manu urgetur, ad velocitatem
progressivam Cochleæ versus corpus pressum. Vires quibus cuneus urget
partes duas ligni fissi est ad vim mallei in cuneum, ut progressus cunei
secundum determinationem vis a malleo in ipsum impressæ, ad velocitatem qua
partes ligni cedunt cuneo, secundum lineas faciebus cunei perpendiculares.
Et par est ratio Machinarum omnium.

Harum efficacia & usus in eo solo consistit ut diminuendo velocitatem
augeamus vim, & contra: Unde solvitur in omni aptorum instrumentorum genere
Problema; _Datum pondus data vi movendi_, aliamve datam resistentiam vi
data superandi. Nam si Machinæ ita formentur ut velocitates Agentis &
Resistentis sint reciproce ut vires, Agens resistentiam sustinebit, &
majori cum velocitatum disparitate eandem vincet. Certe si tanta sit
velocitatum disparitas ut vincatur etiam resistentia omnis, quæ tam ex
contiguorum & inter se labentium corporum attritione, quam ex continuorum &
ab invicem separandorum cohæsione & elevandorum ponderibus oriri solet;
superata omni ea resistentia, vis redundans accelerationem motus sibi
proportionalem, partim in partibus Machinæ, partim in corpore resistente
producet. Cæterum Mechanicam tractare non est hujus instituti. Hisce volui
tantum ostendere quam late pateat, quamq; certa sit Lex tertia motus. Nam
si æstimetur Agentis actio ex ejus vi & velocitate conjunctim; &
Resistentis reactio ex ejus partium singularum velocitatibus & viribus
resistendi ab earum attritione, cohæsione, pondere & acceleratione
oriundis; erunt actio & reactio, in omni instrumentorum usu, sibi invicem
semper æquales. Et quatenus actio propagatur per instrumentum & ultimo
imprimitur in corpus omne resistens, ejus ultima determinatio
determinationi reactionis semper erit contraria.

       *       *       *       *       *


DE MOTU CORPORUM

       *       *       *       *       *

Liber PRIMUS

       *       *       *       *       *

SECT. I.

_De Methodo Rationum primarum & ultimarum, cujus ope sequentia
demonstrantur._

       *       *       *       *       *

LEMMA I.

    _Quantitates, ut & quantitatum rationes, quæ ad æqualitatem dato
    tempore constanter tendunt & eo pacto propius ad invicem accedere
    possunt quam pro data quavis differentia; fiunt ultimo æquales._

Si negas, sit earum ultima differentia D. Ergo nequeunt propius ad
æqualitatem accedere quam pro data differentia D: contra hypothesin.

Lemma II.

[Illustration]

    _Si in figura quavis AacE rectis Aa, AE, & curva acE comprehensa,
    inscribantur parallelogramma quotcunq; Ab, Bc, Cd, &c. sub basibus AB,
    BC, CD, &c. æqualibus, & lateribus Bb, Cc, Dd, &c. figuræ lateri Aa
    parallelis contenta; & compleantur parallelogramma aKbl, bLcm, cMdn,
    &c. Dein horum parallelogrammorum latitudo minuatur, & numerus augeatur
    in infinitum: dico quod ultimæ rationes, quas habent ad se invicem
    figura inscripta AKbLcMdD, circumscripta AalbmcndoE, & curvilinea
    AabcdE, sunt rationes æqualitatis._

Nam figuræ inscriptæ & circumscriptæ differentia est summa
parallelogrammorum Kl + Lm + Mn + Do, hoc est (ob æquales omnium bases)
rectangulum sub unius basi Kb & altitudinum summa Aa, id est rectangulum
ABla. Sed hoc rectangulum, eo quod latitudo ejus AB in infinitum minuitur,
sit minus quovis dato. Ergo, per Lemma I, figura inscripta & circumscripta
& multo magis figura curvilinea intermedia fiunt ultimo æquales.
_Q. E. D._

Lemma III.

    _Eædem rationes ultimæ sunt etiam æqualitatis, ubi parallelogrammorum
    latitudines AB, BC, CD, _&c._ sunt inæquales, & omnes minuuntur in
    infinitum._

Sit enim AF æqualis latitudini maximæ & compleatur parallelogrammum FAaf.
Hoc erit majus quam differentia figuræ inscriptæ & figuræ circumscripta, at
latitudine sua AF in infinitum diminuta, minus fiet quam datum quodvis
rectangulum.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc summa ultima parallelogrammorum evanescentium coincidit
omni ex parte cum figura curvilinea.

_Corol. 2._ Et multo magis figura rectilinea, quæ chordis evanescentium
arcuum ab, bc, cd, _&c._ comprehenditur, coincidit ultimo cum figura
curvilinea.

_Corol. 3._ Ut & figura rectilinea quæ tangentibus eorundem arcuum
circumscribitur.

_Corol. 4._ Et propterea hæ figuræ ultimæ (quoad perimetros acE,) non sunt
rectilineæ, sed rectilinearum limites curvilinei.

Lemma IV.

    _Si in duabus figuris AacE, PprT, inscribantur (ut supra) duæ
    parallelogrammorum series, sitq; idem amborum numerus, & ubi
    latitudines in infinitum diminuitur, rationes ultimæ parallelogrammorum
    in una figura ad parallelogramma in altera, singulorum ad singula, sint
    eædem; dico quod figuræ duæ AacE, PprT, sunt ad invicem in eadem illa
    ratione._

[Illustration]

Etenim ut sunt parallelogramma singula ad singula, ita (componendo) fit
summa omnium ad summam omnium, & ita figura ad figuram; existente nimirum
figura priore (per Lemma III.) ad summam priorem, & posteriore figura ad
summam posteriorem in ratione æqualitatis.

_Corol._ Hinc si duæ cujuscunq; generis quantitates in eundem partium
numerum utcunq; dividantur, & partes illæ, ubi numerus earum augetur &
magnitudo diminuitur in infinitum, datam obtineant rationem ad invicem,
prima ad primam, secunda ad secundam cæteræq; suo ordine ad cæteras; erunt
tota ad invicem in eadem illa data ratione. Nam si in Lemmatis hujus
figuris sumantur parallelogramma inter se ut partes, summæ partium semper
erunt ut summæ parallelogrammorum; atq; adeo, ubi partium &
parallelogrammorum numerus augetur & magnitudo diminuitur in infinitum, in
ultima ratione parallelogrammi ad parallelogrammum, id est (per hypothesin)
in ultima ratione partis ad partem.

Lemma V.

    _Similium figurarum latera omnia, quæ sibi mutuo respondent, sunt
    proportionalia, tam curvilinea quam rectilinea, & areæ sunt in
    duplicata ratione laterum._

Lemma VI.

[Illustration]

    _Si arcus quilibet positione datus AB subtendatur chorda AB, & in
    puncto aliquo A, in medio curvaturæ continuæ, tangatur a recta utrinq;
    producta AD; dein puncta A, B ad invicem accendant & coeant; dico quod
    angulus BAD sub chorda & tangente contentus minuetur in infinitum &
    ultimo evanescet._

Nam producatur AB ad b & AD ad d, & punctis A, B coeuntibus, nullaq; adeo
ipsius Ab parte AB jacente amplius intra curvam, manifestum esi quod hæc
recta Ab, vel coincidet cum tangente Ad, vel ducetur inter tangentem &
curvam. Sed casus posterior est contra naturam Curvaturæ, ergo prior
obtinet.   _Q. E. D._

Lemma VII.

    _Iisdem positis, dico quod ultima ratio arcus, chordæ & tangentis ad
    invicem est ratio æqualitatis. Vide _Fig._ Lem. 6 & 8 vi._

Nam producantur AB & AD ad b & d secanti BD parallela agatur bd. Sitq;
arcus Ab similis arcui AB. Et punctis A, B coeuntibus, angulus dAb, per
Lemma superius, evanescet; adeoq; rectæ Ab, Ad arcus intermedius Ab
coincident, & propterea æquales erunt. Unde & hisce semper proportionales
rectæ AB, AD, & arcus intermedius AB rationem ultimam habebunt æqualitatis.
_Q. E. D._

[Illustration]

_Corol. 1._ Unde si per B ducatur tangenti parallela BF rectam quamvis AF
per A transeuntem perpetuo secans in F, hæc ultimo ad arcum evanescentem AB
rationem habebit æqualitatis, eo quod completo parallelogrammo AFBD,
rationem semper habet æqualitatis ad AD.

_Corol. 2._ Et si per B & A ducantur plures rectæ BE, BD, AF, AG, secantes
tangentem AD & ipsius parallelam BF, ratio ultima abscissarum omnium AD,
AE, BF, BG, chordæq; & arcus AB ad invicem erit ratio æqualitatis.

_Corol. 3._ Et propterea hæ omnes lineæ in omni de rationibus ultimis
argumentatione pro se invicem usurpari possunt.

Lemma VIII.

[Illustration]

    _Si rectæ datæ AR, BR cum arcu AB, chorda AB & tangente AD, triangula
    tria ARB, ARB, ARD constituunt, dein puncta A, B accedunt ad invicem:
    dico quod ultima forma triangulorum evanescentium est similitudinis, &
    ultima ratio æqualitatis._

Nam producantur AB, AD, AR ad b, d & r. Ipsi RD agatur parallela rbd, &
arcui AB similis ducatur arcus Ab. Coeuntibus punctis A, B, angulus bAd
evanescet, & propterea triangula tria rAb, rAb, rAd coincident, suntq; eo
nomine similia & æqualia. Unde & hisce semper similia & proportionalia RAB,
RAB, RAD fient ultimo sibi invicem similia & æqualia.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol._ Et hinc triangula illa in omni de rationibus ultimis
argumentatione pro se invicem usurpari possunt.

Lemma IX.

[Illustration]

    _Si recta AE & Curva AC positione datæ se mutuo secent in angulo dato
    A, & ad rectam illam in alio dato angulo ordinatim applicentur BD, EC,
    curvæ occurrentes in B, C; dein puncta B, C accedant ad punctum A: dico
    quod areæ triangulorum ADB, AEC erunt ultimo ad invicem in duplicata
    ratione laterum._

Etenim in AD producta capiantur Ad, Ae ipsis AD, AE proportionales, &
erigantur ordinatæ db, ec ordinatis DB, EC parallelæ & proportionales.
Producatur AC ad c, ducatur curva Abc ipsi ABC similis, & recta Ag tangatur
curva utraq; in A; & secantur ordinatim applicatæ in F, G, f, g. Tum coeant
puncta B, C cum puncto A, & angulo cAg evanescente, coincident areæ
curvilineæ Abd, Ace cum rectilineis Afd, Age, adeoq; per Lemma V, erunt in
duplicata ratione laterum Ad, Ae: Sed his areis proportionales semper sunt
areæ ABD, ACE, & his lateribus latera AD, AE. Ergo & areæ ABD, ACE sunt
ultimo in duplicata ratione laterum AD, AE.   _Q. E. D._

Lemma X.

    _Spatia, quæ corpus urgente quacunq; vi regulari describit, sunt ipso
    motus initio in duplicata ratione temporum._

Exponantur tempora per lineas AD, AE, & velocitates genitæ per ordinatas
DB, EC, & spatia his velocitatibus descripta erunt ut areæ ABD, ACE his
ordinatis descriptæ, hoc est ipso motus initio (per Lemma IX) in duplicata
ratione temporum AD, AE.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Et hinc facile colligitur, quod corporum similes similium
figurarum partes temporibus proportionalibus describentium errores, qui
viribus æqualibus in partibus istis ad corpora similiter applicatis
generantur, & mensurantur a locis figurarum, ad quæ corpora temporibus
ijsdem proportionalibus absq; viribus istis pervenirent, sunt ut quadrata
temporum in quibus generantur quam proxime.

_Corol. 2._ Errores autem qui viribus proportionalibus similiter applicatis
generantur, sunt ut vires & quadrata temporum conjunctim.

Lemma XI.

    _Subtensa evanescens anguli contactus est ultimo in ratione duplicata
    subtensæ arcus contermini._

[Illustration]

_Cas. 1._ Sit arcus ille AB, tangens ejus AD, subtensa anguli contactus ad
tangentem perpendicularis BD, subtensa arcus AB. Huic subtensæ AB &
tangenti AD perpendiculares erigantur AG, BG, concurrentes in G; dein
accedant puncta D, B, G, ad puncta d, b, g, sitq; J intersectio linearum
BG, AG ultimo facta ubi puncta D, B accedunt usq; ad A. Manifestum est quod
distantia GJ minor esse potest quam assignata quævis. Est autem (ex natura
circulorum per puncta ABG, Abg transeuntium) AB quad. æquale AG × BD & Ab
quad. æquale Ag × bd, adeoq; ratio AB quad. ad Ab quad. componitur ex
rationibus AG ad Ag & BD ad bd. Sed quoniam JG assumi potest minor
longitudine quavis assignata, fieri potest ut ratio AG ad Ag minus differat
a ratione æqualitatis quam pro differentia quavis assignata, adeoq; ut
ratio AB quad. ad Ab quad. minus differat a ratione BD ad bd quam pro
differentia quavis assignata. Est ergo, per Lemma I, ratio ultima AB quad.
ad Ab quad. æqualis rationi ultimæ BD ad bd.   _Q. E. D._

_Cas. 2._ Inclinetur jam BD ad AD in angulo quovis dato, & eadem semper
erit ratio ultima BD ad bd quæ prius, adeoq; eadem ac AB quad. ad Ab quad.
_Q. E. D._

_Cas. 3._ Et quamvis angulus D non detur, tamen anguli D, d ad æqualitatem
semper vergent & propius accedent ad invicem quam pro differentia quavis
assignata, adeoq; ultimo æquales erunt, per Lem. I. & propterea lineæ BD,
bd in eadem ratione ad invicem ac prius.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Unde cum tangentes AD, Ad, arcus AB, Ab & eorum sinus BC, bc
fiant ultimo chordis AB, Ab æquales; erunt etiam illorum quadrata ultimo ut
subtensæ BD, bd.

_Corol. 2._ Triangula rectilinea ADB, Adb sunt ultimo in triplicata ratione
laterum AD, Ad, inq; sesquiplicata laterum DB, db: Utpote in composita
ratione laterum AD & DB, Ad & db existentia. Sic & triangula ABC, Abc sunt
ultimo in triplicata ratione laterum BC, bc.

_Corol. 3._ Et quoniam DB, db sunt ultimo parallelæ & in duplicata ratione
ipsarum AD, Ad; erunt areæ ultimæ curvilineæ ADB, Adb (ex natura Parabolæ)
duæ tertiæ partes triangulorum rectilineorum ADB, Adb, & segmenta AB, Ab
partes tertiæ eorundem triangulorum. Et inde hæ areæ & hæc segmenta erunt
in triplicata ratione tum tangentium AD, Ad; tum chordarum & arcuum AB, Ab.

_Scholium._

Cæterum in his omnibus supponimus angulum contactus nec infinite majorem
esse angulis contactuum, quos circuli continent cum tangentibus suis, nec
iisdem infinite minorem; hoc est curvaturam ad punctum A, nec infinite
parvam esse nec infinite magnam, seu intervallum AJ finitæ esse
magnitudinis. Capi enim potest DB ut AD^3: quo in casu circulus nullus per
punctum A inter tangentem AD & curvam AB duci potest, proindeq; angulus
contactus erit infinite minor circularibus. Et simili argumento si fiat DB
successive ut AD^4, AD^5, AD^6, AD^7, &c. habebitur series angulorum
contactus pergens in infinitum, quorum quilibet posterior est infinite
minor priore. Et si fiat DB successive ut AD^2, AD^{3/2}, AD^{4/3},
AD^{5/4}, AD^{6/5}, AD^{7/6}, &c. habebitur alia series infinita angulorum
contactus, quorum primus est ejusdem generis cum circularibus, secundus
infinite major, & quilibet posterior infinite major priore. Sed & inter
duos quosvis ex his angulis potest series utrinq; in infinitum pergens
angulorum intermediorum inseri, quorum quilibet posterior erit infinite
major priore. Ut si inter terminos AD^2 & AD^3 inseratur series AD^{13/6},
AD^{11/5}, AD^{9/4}, AD^{7/3}, AD^{5/2}, AD^{8/3}, AD^{11/4}, AD^{14/5},
AD^{17/6}, &c. Et rursus inter binos quosvis angulos hujus seriei inseri
potest series nova angulorum intermediorum ab invicem infinitis intervallis
differentium. Neq; novit natura limitem.

Quæ de curvis lineis deq; superficiebus comprehensis demonstrata sunt,
facile applicantur ad solidorum superficies curvas & contenta. Præmisi vero
hæc Lemmata ut effugerem tædium deducendi perplexas demonstrationes, more
veterum Geometrarum, ad absurdum. Contractiores enim redduntur
demonstrationes per methodum indivisibilium. Sed quoniam durior est
indivisibilium Hypothesis; & propterea Methodus illa minus Geometrica
censetur, malui demonstrationes rerum sequentium ad ultimas quantitatum
evanescentium summas & rationes, primasq; nascentium, id est, ad limites
summarum & rationum deducere, & propterea limitum illorum demonstrationes
qua potui breuitate præmittere. His enim idem præstatur quod per methodum
indivisibilium, & principiis demonstratis jam tutius utemur. Proinde in
sequentibus, siquando quantitates tanquam ex particulis constantes
consideravero, vel si pro rectis usurpavero lineolas curvas, nolim
indivisibilia sed evanescentia divisibilia, non summas & rationes partium
determinatarum, sed summarum & rationum limites semper intelligi, vimq;
talium demonstrationum ad methodum præcedentium Lemmatum semper revocari.

Objectio est, quod quantitatum evanescentium nulla sit ultima proportio;
quippe quæ, antequam evanuerunt, non est ultima, ubi evanuerunt, nulla est.
Sed & eodem argumento æque contendi posset nullam esse corporis ad certum
locum pergentis velocitatem ultimam. Hanc enim, antequam corpus attingit
locum, non esse ultimam, ubi attigit, nullam esse. Et responsio facilis
est. Per velocitatem ultimam intelligi eam, qua corpus movetur neq;
antequam attingit locum ultimum & motus cessat, neq; postea, sed tunc cum
attingit, id est illam ipsam velocitatem quacum corpus attingit locum
ultimum & quacum motus cessat. Et similiter per ultimam rationem
quantitatum evanescentium intelligendam esse rationem quantitatum non
antequam evanescunt, non postea, sed quacum evanescunt. Pariter & ratio
prima nascentium est ratio quacum nascuntur. Et summa prima & ultima est
quacum esse (vel augeri & minui) incipiunt & cessant. Extat limes quem
velocitas in fine motus attingere potest, non autem transgredi. Hæc est
velocitas ultima. Et par est ratio limitis quantitatum & proportionum
omnium incipientium & cessantium. Cumq; hic limes sit certus & definitus,
Problema est vere Geometricum eundem determinare. Geometrica vero omnia in
aliis Geometricis determinandis ac demonstrandis legitime usurpantur.

Contendi etiam potest, quod si dentur ultimæ quantitatum evanescentium
rationes, dabuntur & ultimæ magnitudines; & sic quantitas omnis constabit
ex indivisibilibus, contra quam _Euclides_ de incommensurabilibus, in libro
decimo Elementorum, demonstravit. Verum hæc Objectio falsæ innititur
hypothesi. Ultimæ rationes illæ quibuscum quantitates evanescunt, revera
non sunt rationes quantitatum ultimarum, sed limites ad quos quantitatum
sine limite decrescentium rationes semper appropinquant, & quas propius
assequi possunt quam pro data quavis differentia, nunquam vero transgredi,
neq; prius attingere quam quantitates diminuuntur in infinitum. Res clarius
intelligetur in infinite magnis. Si quantitates duæ quarum data est
differentia augeantur in infinitum, dabitur harum ultima ratio, nimirum
ratio æqualitatis, nec tamen ideo dabuntur quantitates ultimæ seu maximæ
quarum ista est ratio. Igitur in sequentibus, siquando facili rerum
imaginationi consulens, dixero quantitates quam minimas, vel evanescentes
vel ultimas, cave intelligas quantitates magnitudine determinatas, sed
cogita semper diminuendas sine limite.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. II.

_De Inventione Virium Centripetarum._

Prop. I. Theorema. I.

    _Areas quas corpora in gyros acta radiis ad immobile centrum virium
    ductis describunt, & in planis immobilibus consistere, & esse
    temporibus proportionales._

[Illustration]

Dividatur tempus in partes æquales, & prima temporis parte describat corpus
vi insita rectam AB. Idem secunda temporis parte, si nil impediret, recta
pergeret ad c, (per Leg. I) describens lineam Bc æqualem ipsi AB, adeo ut
radiis AS, BS, cS ad centrum actis, consectæ forent æquales areæ ASB, BSc.
Verum ubi corpus venit ad B, agat vis centripeta impulsu unico sed magno,
faciatq; corpus a recta Bc deflectere & pergere in recta BC. Ipsi BS
parallela agatur cC occurrens BC in C, & completa secunda temporis parte,
corpus (per Legum Corol. I) reperietur in C, in eodem plano cum triangulo
ASB. Junge SC, & triangulum SBC, ob parallelas SB, Cc, æquale erit
triangulo SBc, atq; adeo etiam triangulo SAB. Simili argumento si vis
centripeta successive agat in C, D, E, &c. faciens ut corpus singulis
temporis particulis singulas describat rectas CD, DE, EF, &c. jacebunt hæ
in eodem plano, & triangulum SCD triangulo SBC & SDE ipsi SCD & SEF ipsi
SDE æquale erit. Æqualibus igitur temporibus æquales areæ in plano immoto
describuntur: & componendo, sunt arearum summæ quævis SADS, SAFS inter se,
ut sunt tempora descriptionum. Augeatur jam numerus & minuatur latitudo
triangulorum in infinitum, & eorum ultima perimeter ADF, (per Corollarium
quartum Lemmatis tertii) erit linea curva; adeoq; vis centripeta qua corpus
de tangente hujus curvæ perpetuo retrahitur, aget indesinenter; areæ vero
quævis descriptæ SADS, SAFS temporibus descriptionum semper proportionales,
erunt iisdem temporibus in hoc casu proportionales.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ In mediis non resistentibus, si areæ non sunt temporibus
proportionales, vires non tendunt ad concursum radiorum.

_Corol. 2._ In mediis omnibus, si arearum descriptio acceleratur, vires non
tendunt ad concursum radiorum, sed inde declinant in consequentia.

Pro. II. Theor. II.

    _Corpus omne quod, cum movetur in linea aliqua curva, & radio ducto ad
    punctum vel immobile, vel motu rectilineo uniformiter progrediens,
    describit areas circa punctum illud temporibus proportionales, urgetur
    a vi centripeta tendente ad idem punctum._

_Cas. 1._ Nam corpus omne quod movetur in linea curva, detorquetur de cursu
rectilineo per vim aliquam in ipsum agentem. (per Leg. I.) Et vis illa qua
corpus de cursu rectilineo detorquetur & cogitur triangula quam minima SAB,
SBC, SCD &c. circa punctum immobile S, temporibus æqualibus æqualia
describere, agit in loco B secundum lineam parallelam ipsi cC (per Prop. 40
Lib. I Elem. & Leg. II.) hoc est secundum lineam BS & in loco C secundum
lineam ipsi dD parallelam, hoc est secundum lineam CS, &c. Agit ergo semper
secundum lineas tendentes ad punctum illud immobile S.   _Q. E. D._

_Cas. 2._ Et, per Legum Corollarium quintum, perinde est sive quiescat
superficies in qua corpus describit figuram curvilineam, sive moveatur
eadem una cum corpore, figura descripta & puncto suo S uniformiter in
directum.

_Scholium._

Urgeri potest corpus a vi centripeta composita ex pluribus viribus. In hoc
casu sensus Propositionis est, quod vis illa quæ ex omnibus componitur,
tendit ad punctum S. Porro si vis aliqua agat secundum lineam superficiei
descriptæ perpendicularem, hæc faciet corpus deflectere a plano sui motus,
sed quantitatem superficiei descriptæ nec augebit nec minuet, & propterea
in compositione virium negligenda est.

Prop. III. Theor. III.

    _Corpus omne quod, radio ad centrum corporis alterius utcunq; moti
    ducto, describit areas circa centrum illud temporibus proportionales,
    urgetur vi composita ex vi centripeta tendente ad corpus alterum & ex
    vi omni acceleratrice, qua corpus alterum urgetur._

Nam (per Legum Corol. 6.) si vi nova, quæ æqualis & contraria sit illi qua
corpus alterum urgetur, urgeatur corpus utrumq; secundum lineas parallelas,
perget corpus primum describere circa corpus alterum areas easdem ac prius:
vis autem qua corpus alterum urgebatur, jam destruetur per vim sibi æqualem
& contrariam, & propterea (per Leg. 1.) corpus illud alterum vel quiescet
vel movebitur uniformiter in directum, & corpus primum, urgente differentia
virium, perget areas temporibus proportionales circa corpus alterum
describere. Tendit igitur (per Theor. 2.) differentia virium ad corpus
illud alterum ut centrum.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si corpus unum radio ad alterum ducto describit areas
temporibus proportionales, atq; de vi tota (sive simplici, sive ex viribus
pluribus, juxta Legum Corollarium secundum, composita,) qua corpus prius
urgetur, subducatur (per idem Legum Corollarium) vis tota acceleratrix qua
corpus alterum urgetur; vis omnis reliqua qua corpus prius urgetur tendet
ad corpus alterum ut centrum.

_Corol. 2._ Et si areæ illæ sunt temporibus quamproxime proportionales, vis
reliqua tendet ad corpus alterum quamproxime.

_Corol. 3._ Et vice versa, si vis reliqua tendit quamproxime ad corpus
alterum, erunt areæ illæ temporibus quamproxime proportionales.

_Corol. 4._ Si corpus radio ad alterum corpus ducto describit areas quæ,
cum temporibus collatæ, sunt valde inæquales, & corpus illud alterum vel
quiescit vel movetur uniformiter in directum; actio vis centripetæ ad
corpus illud alterum tendentis, vel nulla est, vel miscetur & componitur
cum actionibus admodum potentibus aliarum virium: Visq; tota ex omnibus, si
plures sunt vires, composita, ad aliud (sive immobile sive mobile) centrum
dirigitur, circum quod æquabilis est arearum descriptio. Idem obtinet ubi
corpus alterum motu quocunq; movetur, si modo vis centripeta sumatur, quæ
restat post subductionem vis totius agentis in corpus illud alterum.

_Scholium_

Quoniam æquabilis arearum descriptio Index est centri quod vis illa
respicit qua corpus maxime afficitur, corpus autem vi ad hoc centrum
tendente retinetur in orbita sua, & motus omnis circularis recte dicitur
circa centrum illud fieri, cujus vi corpus retrahitur de motu rectilineo &
retinetur in Orbita: quidni usurpemus in sequentibus æquabilem arearum
descriptionem ut Indicem centri circum quod motus omnis circularis in
spatiis liberis peragitur?

Prop. IV. Theor. IV.

    _Corporum quæ diversos circulos æquabili motu describunt, vires
    centripetas ad centra eorundem circulorum tendere, & esse inter se ut
    arcuum simul descriptorum quadrata applicata ad circulorum radios._

[Illustration]

Corpora B, b in circumferentiis circulorum BD, bd gyrantia, simul
describant arcus BD, bd. Quoniam sola vi insita describerent tangentes BC,
bc his arcubus æquales, manifestum est quod vires centripetæ sunt quæ
perpetuo retrahunt corpora de tangentibus ad circumferentias circulorum,
atq; adeo hæ sunt ad invicem in ratione prima spatiorum nascentium CD, cd:
tendunt vero ad centra circulorum per Theor. II, propterea quod areæ radiis
descriptæ ponuntur temporibus proportionales. Fiat figura tkb figuræ DCB
similis, & per Lemma V, lineola CD erit ad lineolam kt ut arcus BD ad arcum
bt: nec non, per Lemma XI, lineola nascens tk ad lineolam nascentem dc ut
bt quad. ad bd quad. & ex æquo lineola nascens DC ad lineolam nascentem dc
ut BD × bt ad bd quad. seu quod perinde est, ut BD × bt ÷ Sb ad bd quad. ÷
Sb, adeoq; (ob æquales rationes bt ÷ Sb & BD ÷ SB) ut BD quad. ÷ SB ad bd
quad. ÷ Sb   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Hinc vires centripetæ sunt ut velocitatum quadrata applicata ad
radios circulorum.

_Corol. 2._ Et reciproce ut quadrata temporum periodicorum applicata ad
radios ita sunt hæ vires inter se. Id est (ut cum Geometris loquar) hæ
vires sunt in ratione composita ex duplicata ratione velocitatum directe &
ratione simplici radiorum inverse: necnon in ratione composita ex ratione
simplici radiorum directe & ratione duplicata temporum periodicorum
inverse.

_Corol. 3._ Unde si tempora periodica æquantur, erunt tum vires centripetæ
tum velocitates ut radii, & vice versa.

_Corol. 4._ Si quadrata temporum periodicorum sunt ut radii, vires
centripetæ sunt æquales, & velocitates in dimidiata ratione radiorum: Et
vice versa.

_Corol. 5._ Si quadrata temporum periodicorum sunt ut quadrata radiorum,
vires centripetæ sunt reciproce ut radii, & velocitates æquales; Et vice
versa.

_Corol. 6._ Si quadrata temporum periodicorum sunt ut cubi radiorum, vires
centripeta: sunt reciproce ut quadrata radiorum; velocitates autem in
radiorum dimidiata ratione: Et vice versa.

_Corol. 7._ Eadem omnia de temporibus, velocitatibus & viribus, quibus
corpora similes figurarum quarumcunq; similium, centraq; similiter posita
habentium, partes describunt, consequuntur ex Demonstratione præcedentium
ad hosce casus applicata.

_Scholium._

Casus Corollarii sexti obtinet in corporibus cælestibus (ut seorsum
colligerunt etiam nostrates _Wrennus, Hookius & Halleus_) & propterea quæ
spectant ad vim centripetam decrescentem in duplicata ratione distantiarum
a centris decrevi fusius in sequentibus exponere.

Porro præcedentis demonstrationis beneficio colligitur etiam proportio vis
centripetæ ad vim quamlibet notam, qualis est ea gravitatis. Nam cum vis
illa, quo tempore corpus percurrit arcum BC, impellat ipsum per spatium CD,
quod ipso motus initio æquale est quadrato arcus illius BD ad circuli
diametrum applicato; & corpus omne vi eadem in eandem semper plagam
continuata, describat spatia in duplicata ratione temporum: Vis illa, quo
tempore corpus revolvens arcum quemvis datum describit, efficiet ut corpus
idem recta progrediens describat spatium quadrato arcus illius ad circuli
diametrum applicato æquale; adeoq; est ad vim gravitatis ut spatium illud
ad spatium quod grave cadendo eodem tempore describit. Et hujusmodi
Propositionibus _Hugenius_, in eximio suo Tractatu de Horologio
oscillatorio, vim gravitatis cum revolventium viribus centrifugis contulit.

Demonstrari etiam possunt præcedentia in hunc modum. In circulo quovis
describi intelligatur Polygonum laterum quotcunq; Et si corpus in Polygoni
lateribus data cum velocitate movendo, ad ejus angulos singulos a circulo
reflectatur; vis qua singulis reflexionibus impingit in circulum erit ut
ejus velocitas, adeoq; summa virium in dato tempore erit ut velocitas illa
& numerus reflexionum conjunctim, hoc est (si Polygonum detur specie) ut
longitudo dato illo tempore descripta & longitudo eadem applicata ad Radium
circuli, id est ut quadratum longitudinis illius applicatum ad Radium;
adeoq; si Polygonum lateribus infinite diminutis coincidat cum circulo, ut
quadratum arcus dato tempore descripti applicatum ad radium. Hæc est vis
qua corpus urget circulum, & huic æqualis est vis contraria qua circulus
continuo repellit corpus centrum versus.

Prop. V. Prob. I.

[Illustration]

    _Data quibuscunq; in locis velocitate, qua corpus figuram datam viribus
    ad commune aliquod centrum tendentibus describit, centrum illud
    invenire._

Figuram descriptam tangant rectæ tres PT, TQV, VR in punctis totidem P, Q,
R, concurrentes in T & V. Ad tangentes erigantur perpendicula PA, QB, RC,
velocitatibus corporis in punctis illis P, Q, R a quibus eriguntur
reciproce proportionalia; id est ita ut sit PA ad QB ut velocitas in Q ad
velocitatem in P, & QB ad RC ut velocitas in R ad velocitatem in Q. Per
perpendiculorum terminos A, B, C ad angulos rectos ducantur AD, DBE, EC
concurrentia in D & E: Et actæ TD, VE concurrent in centro quæsito S.

Nam cum corpus in P & Q radiis ad centrum ductis areas describat temporibus
proportionales, sintq; areæ illæ simul descriptæ ut velocitates in P & Q
ductæ respective in perpendicula a centro in tangentes PT, QT demissa:
Erunt perpendicula illa ut velocitates reciproce, adeoq; ut perpendicula
AP, BQ directe, id est ut perpendicula a puncto D in tangentes demissa.
Unde facile colligitur quod puncta S, D, T sunt in una recta. Et simili
argumento puncta S, E, V sunt etiam in una recta; & propterea centrum S in
concursu rectarum TD, VE versatur.   _Q. E. D._

Pro. VI. Theor. V.

    _Si corpus P revolvendo circa centrum S, describat lineam quamvis
    curvam APQ, tangat vero recta ZPR curvam illam in puncto quovis P, & ad
    tangentem ab alio quovis curvæ Q agatur QR distantiæ SP parallela, ac
    demittatur QT perpendicularis ad distantiam SP: Dico quod vis
    centripeta sit reciproce ut solidum SP quad. × QT quad. ÷ QR, si modo
    solidi illius ea semper sumatur quantitas quæ ultimo fit ubi coeunt
    puncta P & Q._

[Illustration]

Namq; in figura indefinite parva QRPT lineola nascens QR, dato tempore, est
ut vis centripeta (per Leg. II.) & data vi, ut quadratum temporis (per Lem.
X.) atq; adeo, neutro dato, ut vis centripeta & quadratum temporis
conjunctim, adeoq; vis centripeta ut lineola QR directe & quadratum
temporis inverse. Est autem tempus ut area SPQ, ejus dupla SP × QT, id est
ut SP & QT conjunctim, adeoq; vis centripeta ut QR directe atq; SP quad. in
QT quad. inverse, id est ut SP quad. × QT quad. ÷ QR inverse.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol._ Hinc si detur figura quævis, & in ea punctum ad quod vis
centripeta dirigitur; inveniri potest lex vis centripetæ quæ corpus in
figuræ illius perimetro gyrari faciet. Nimirum computandum est solidum SP
quad. × QT quad. ÷ QR huic vi reciproce proportionale. Ejus rei dabimus
exempla in problematis sequentibus.

Prop. VII. Prob. II.

[Illustration]

    _Gyretur corpus in circumferentia circuli, requiritur lex vis
    centripetæ tendentis ad punctum aliquod in circumferentia datum._

Esto circuli circumferentia SQPA, centrum vis centripetæ S, corpus in
circumferentia latum P, locus proximus in quem movebitur Q. Ad diametrum SA
& rectam SP demitte perpendiculi PK, QT, & per Q ipsi SP parallelam age LR
occurrentem circulo in L & tangenti PR in R, & coeant TQ, PR in Z. Ob
similitudinem triangulorum ZQR, ZTP, SPA erit RP quad. (hoc est QRL) ad QT
quad. ut SA quad. ad SP quad. Ergo QRL × SP quad. ÷ SA quad. æquatur QT
quad. Ducantur hæc æqualia in SP quad. ÷ QR, & punctis P & Q coeuntibus,
scribatur SP pro RL. Sic fiet SP qc. ÷ SAq. æquale QTq. × SPq. ÷ QR. Ergo
(per Corol. Theor. V.) vis centripeta reciproce est ut SP qc. ÷ SAq., id
est (ob datum SA quad.) ut quadrato-cubus distantiæ SP. Quod erat
inveniendum.

Prop. VIII. Prob. III.

[Illustration]

    _Moveatur corpus in circulo PQA: ad hunc effectum requiritur lex vis
    centripetæ tendentis ad punctum adeo longinquum, ut lineæ omnes PS, RS
    ad id ductæ, pro parallelis haberi possint._

A circuli centro C agatur semidiameter CA parallelas istas
perpendiculariter secans in M & N, & jungantur CP. Ob similia triangula
CPM, & TPZ, vel (per Lem. VIII.) TPQ, est CPq. ad PMq. ut PQq. vel (per
Lem. VII.) PRq. ad QTq. & ex natura circuli rectangulum QR × RN + QN æquale
est PR quadrato. Coeuntibus autem punctis P, Q fit RN + QN æqualis 2PM.
Ergo est CP quad. ad PM quad. ut QR × 2PM ad QT quad. adeoq; QT quad. ÷ QR
æquale 2PM cub. ÷ CP quad., & QT quad. × SP quad. ÷ QR æquale 2PM cub. × SP
quad. ÷ CP quad. Est ergo (per Corol. Theor. V.) vis centripeta reciproce
ut 2PM cub. × SP quad. ÷ CP quad. hoc est (neglecta ratione determinata 2SP
quad. ÷ CP quad.) reciproce ut PM cub.   _Q. E. I._

_Scholium._

Et simili argumento corpus movebitur in Ellipsi vel etiam in Hyperbola vel
Parabola, vi centripeta quæ sit reciproce ut cubus ordinatim applicatæ ad
centrum virium maxime longinquum tendentis.

Prop. IX. Prob. IV.

[Illustration]

    _Gyretur corpus in spiral PQS secante radios omnes SP, SQ, &c. in
    angulo dato: Requiritur lex vis centripetæ tendentis ad centrum
    spiralis._

Detur angulus indefinite parvus PSQ, & ob datos omnes angulos dabitur
specie figura SPQRT. Ergo datur ratio QT ÷ RQ estq; QT quad. ÷ QR ut QT,
hoc est ut SP. Mutetur jam utcunq; angulus PSQ, & recta QR angulum
contactus QPR subtendens mutabitur (per Lemma XI.) in duplicata ratione
ipsius PR vel QT. Ergo manebit QT quad. ÷ QR eadem quæ prius, hoc est ut
SP. Quare QTq. × SPq. ÷ QR est ut SP cub. id est (per Corol. Theor. V.) vis
centripeta ut cubus distantiæ SP.   _Q. E. I._

Lemma XII.

    _Parallelogramma omnia circa datam Ellipsin descripta esse inter se
    æqualia. Idem intellige de Parallelogrammis in Hyperbola circum
    diametros ejus descriptis._

Constat utrumq; ex Conicis.

Prop. X. Prob. V.

    _Gyretur corpus in Ellipsi: requiritur lex vis centripetæ tendentis ad
    centrum Ellipseos._

[Illustration]

Sunto CA, CB semiaxes Ellipseos; GP, DK diametri conjugatæ; PF, Qt,
perpendicula ad diametros; Qv ordinatim applicata ad diametrum GP; & si
compleatur parallelogrammum QvRP, erit (ex Conicis) PvG ad Qv quad. ut PC
quad. ad CD quad. & (ob similia triangula Qvt, PCF) Qv quad. est ad Qt
quad. ut PC quad. ad PF quad. & conjunctis rationibus, PvG ad Qt quad. ut
PC quad. ad CD quad. & PC quad. ad PF quad. id est vG ad Qt quad. ÷ Pv ut
PC quad. ad CDq. × PFq. ÷ PCq.. Scribe QR pro Pv, & (per Lemma xii.) BC ×
CA pro CD × PF, nec non (punctis P & Q coeuntibus) 2PC pro vG, & ductis
extremis & medijs in se mutuo, fiet QTq. × PCq. ÷ QR æquale 2BCq. × CAq. ÷
PC. Est ergo (per Corol. Theor. V.) vis centripeta reciproce ut 2BCq. ×
CAq. ÷ PC, id est (ob datum 2BCq. × CAq.) ut 1 ÷ PC, hoc est, directe ut
distantia PC.   _Q. E. I._

_Corol. 1._ Unde vicissim si vis sit ut distantia, movebitur corpus in
Ellipsi centrum habente in centro virium, aut forte in circulo, in quem
Ellipsis migrare potest.

_Corol. 2._ Et æqualia erunt revolutionum in Figuris universis circa
centrum idem factarum periodica tempora. Nam tempora illa in Ellipsibus
similibus æqualia sunt per Corol. 3 & 7 Prop. IV: In Ellipsibus autem
communem habentibus axem majorem, sunt ad invicem ut Ellipseon areæ totæ
directe & arearum particulæ simul descriptæ inverse; id est ut axes minores
directe & corporum velocitates in verticibus principalibus inverse, hoc est
ut axes illi directe & ordinatim applicatæ ad axes alteros inverse, &
propterea (ob æqualitatem rationum directarum & inversarum) in ratione
æqualitatis.

_Scholium._

Si Ellipsis, centro in infinitum abeunte, vertatur in Parabolam, corpus
movebitur in hac Parabola, & vis ad centrum infinite distans jam tendens,
evadet æquabilis. Hoc est Theorema _Galilei_. Et si Conisectio Parabolica,
inclinatione plani ad conum sectum mutata, vertatur in Hyperbolam,
movebitur corpus in hujus perimetro, vi centripeta in centrifugam versa.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. III.

_De motu Corporum in Conicis Sectionibus excentricis._

Prop. XI. Prob. VI.

    _Revolvatur corpus in Ellipsi: Requiritur lex vis centripetæ tendentis
    ad umbilicum Ellipseos._

[Illustration]

Esto Ellipseos superioris umbilicus S. Agatur SP secans Ellipseos tum
diametrum DK in E, tum ordinatim applicatam Qv in x, & compleatur
parallelogrammum QxPR. Patet EP æqualem esse semiaxi majori AC, eo quod
acta ab altero Ellipseos umbilico H linea HI ipsi EC parallela, (ob æquales
CS, CH) æquentur ES, EI, adeo ut EP semisumma sit ipsarum PS, PI, id est
(ob parallelas HI, PR & angulos æquales IPR, HPZ) ipsorum PS, PH, quæ
conjunctim axem totum 2AC adæquant. Ad SP demittatur perpendicularis QT, &
Ellipseos latere recto principali (seu 2BC quad. ÷ AC) dicto L, erit L × QR
ad L × Pv ut QR ad Pv; id est ut PE (seu AC) ad PC; & L × Pv ad GvP ut L ad
Gv; & GvP ad Qv quad. ut CP quad. ad CD quad.; & (per Lem. VIII.) Qv quad.
ad Qx quad. punctis Q & P coeuntibus, est ratio æqualitatis, & Qx quad. seu
Qv quad. est ad QT quad. ut EP quad. ad PF quad., id est ut CA quad. ad PF
quad. sive (per Lem. XII.) ut CD quad. ad CB quad. Et conjunctis his
omnibus rationibus, L × QR fit ad QT quad. ut AC ad PC + L ad Gv + CPq. ad
CDq. + CDq. ad CBq. id est ut AC × L (seu 2CBq.) × CPq. ad PC × Gv × CBq.
sive ut 2PC ad Gv. Sed punctis Q & P coeuntibus, æquantur 2PC & Gv. Ergo &
his proportionalia L × QR & QT quad. æquantur. Ducantur hæc aqualia in SPq.
÷ QR & fiet L × SPq. æquale SPq. × QTq. ÷ QR. Ergo (per Corol. Theor. V.)
vis centripeta reciproce est ut L × SPq. id est reciproce in ratione
duplicata distantiæ SP.   _Q. E. I._

Eadem brevitate qua traduximus Problema quintum ad Parabolam, & Hyperbolam,
liceret idem hic facere: verum ob dignitatem Problematis & usum ejus in
sequentibus, non pigebit casus cæteros demonstratione confirmare.

Prop. XII. Prob. VII.

    _Moveatur corpus in Hyperbola: requiritur lex vis centripetæ tendentis
    ad umbilicum figuræ._

[Illustration]

Sunto CA, CB semi-axes Hyperbolæ; PG, KD diametri conjugatæ; PF, Qt
perpendicula ad diametros; & Qv ordinatim applicata ad diametrum GP. Agatur
SP secans tum diametrum DK in E, tum ordinatim applicatam Qv in x, &
compleatur parallelogrammum QRPx. Patet EP æqualem esse semi-axi transverso
AC, eo quod, acta ab altero Hyperbolæ umbilico H linea HI ipsi EC
parallela, ob æquales CS, CH, æquentur ES, EI; adeo ut EP semidifferentia
sit ipsarum PS, PI, id est (ob parallelas HI, PR & angulos æquales IPR,
HPZ) ipsarum PI, PH, quarum differentia axem totum 2AC adæquat. Ad SP
demittatur perpendicularis QT. Et Hyperbolæ latere recto principali (seu
2BCq. ÷ AC) dicto L, erit L × QR ad L × Pv ut QR ad Pv, id est, ut PE (seu
AC) ad PC; Et L × Pv ad GvP ut L ad Gv; & GvP ad Qvq. ut CPq. ad CDq.; &
(per Lem. VIII.) Qvq. ad Qxq., punctis Q & P coeuntibus fit ratio
æqualitatis; & Qxq. seu Qvq. est ad QTq. ut EPq. ad PFq., id est ut CAq. ad
PFq., sive (per Lem. XII.) ut CDq. ad CBq.: & conjunctis his omnibus
rationibus L × QR fit ad QTq. ut AC ad PC + L ad Gv + CPq. ad CDq. + CDq.
ad CBq.: id est ut AC × L (seu 2BCq.) × PCq. ad PC × Gv × CB quad. sive ut
2PC ad Gv, sed punctis Q & P coeuntibus æquantur 2PC & Gv. Ergo & his
proportionalia L × QR & QTq. æquantur. Ducantur hæc æqualia in SPq. ÷ QR &
fiet L × SPq. æquale SPq. × QTq. ÷ QR. Ergo (per Corol. Theor. V.) vis
centripeta reciproce est ut L × SPq. id est in ratione duplicata distantiæ
SP.   _Q. E. I._

Eodem modo demonstratur quod corpus, hac vi centripeta in centrifugam
versa, movebitur in Hyperbola conjugata.

Lemma XIII.

    _Latus rectum Parabolæ ad verticem quemvis pertinens, est quadruplum
    distantiæ verticis illius ab umbilico figuræ._ Patet ex Conicis.

Lemma XIV.

[Illustration]

    _Perpendiculum quod ab umbilico Parabolæ ad tangentem ejus demittitur,
    medium est proportionale inter distantias umbilici a puncto contactus &
    a vertice principali figuræ._

Sit enim APQ Parabola, S umbilicus ejus, A vertex principalis, P punctum
contactus, PO ordinatim applicata ad diametrum principalem, PM tangens
diametro principali occurrens in M, & SN linea perpendicularis ab umbilico
in tangentem. Jungatur AN, & ob æquales MS & SP, MN & NP, MA & AO,
parallelæ erunt rectæ AN & OP, & inde triangulum SAN rectangulum erit ad A
& simile triangulis æqualibus SMN, SPN. Ergo PS est ad SN ut SN ad SA.
_Q. E. D._

Corol. 1. PSq. est ad SNq. ut PS ad SA.

Corol. 2. Et ob datam SA, est SNq. ut PS.

Corol. 3. Et concursus tangentis cujusvis PM cum recta SN quæ ab umbilico
in ipsam perpendicularis est, incidit in rectam AN, quæ Parabolam tangit in
vertice principali.

Prop. XIII. Prob. VIII.

    _Moveatur corpus in perimetro Parabolæ: requiritur Lex vis centripetæ
    tendentis ad umbilicum hujus figuræ._

[Illustration]

Maneat constructio Lemmatis, sitq; P corpus in perimetro Parabolæ, & a loco
Q in quem corpus proxime movetur, age ipsi SP Parallelam QR &
perpendicularem QT, necnon Qv tangentiparallelam & occurrentem tum diametro
YPG in v, tum distantiæ SP in x. Jam ob similia triangula Pxv, MSP &
æqualia unius latera SM, SP, æqualia sunt alterius latera Px seu QR & Pv.
Sed, ex Conicis, quadratum ordinatæ Qv æquale est rectangulo sub latere
recto & segmento diametri Pv, id est (per Lem. XIII.) rectangulo 4PS × Pv
seu 4PS × QR; & punctis P & Q coeuntibus, ratio Qv ad Qx (per Lem. 8.) fit
æqualitatis. Ergo Qxq. eo in casu, æquale est rectangulo 4PS × QR. Est
autem (ob æquales angulos QxT, MPS, PMO) Qxq. ad QTq. ut PSq. ad SNq. hoc
est (per Corol. I. Lem. XIV.) ut PS ad AS, id est ut 4PS × QR ad 4AS × QR,
& inde (per Prop. 9. Lib. V. Elem.) QTq. & 4AS × QR æquantur. Ducantur hæc
æqualia in SPq. ÷ QR, & fiet SPq. × QTq. ÷ QR æquale SPq. × 4AS: &
propterea (per Corol. Theor. V.) vis centripeta est reciproce ut SPq. ×
4AS, id est, ob datam 4AS, reciproce in duplicata ratione distantiæ SP.
_Q. E. I._

_Corol. I._ Ex tribus novissimis Proportionibus consequens est, quod si
corpus quodvis P, secundum lineam quamvis rectam PR, quacunq; cum
velocitate exeat de loco P, & vi centripeta quæ sit reciproce
proportionalis quadrato distantiæ a centro, simul agitetur; movebitur hoc
corpus in aliqua sectionum Conicarum umbilicum habente in centro virium; &
contra.

_Corol. II._ Et si velocitas, quacum corpus exit de loco suo P, ea sit, qua
lineola PR in minima aliqua temporis particula describi possit, & vis
centripeta potis sit eodem tempore corpus idem movere per spatium QR:
movebitur hoc corpus in Conica aliqua sectione cujus latus rectum est
quantitas illa QTq. ÷ QR quæ ultimo fit ubi lineolæ PR, QR in infinitum
diminuuntur. Circulum in his Corollariis refero ad Ellipsin, & casum
excipio ubi corpus recta descendit ad centrum.

Prop. XIV. Theor. VI.

    _Si corpora plura revolvantur circa centrum commune, & vis centripeta
    decrescat in duplicata ratione distantiarum a centro; dico quod Orbium
    Latera recta sunt in duplicata ratione arearum quas corpora, radiis ad
    centrum ductis, eodem tempore describunt._

Nam per Corol. II. Prob. VIII. Latus rectum L æquale est quantitati QTq. ÷
QR quæ ultimo fit ubi coeunt puncta P & Q. Sed linea minima QR, dato
tempore, est ut vis centripeta generans, hoc est (per Hypothesin) reciproce
ut SPq. Ergo QTq. ÷ QR est ut QTq. × SPq. hoc est, latus rectum L in
duplicata ratione areæ QT × SP.   _Q. E. D._

Corol. Hinc Ellipseos area tota, eiq; proportionale rectangulum sub axibus,
est in ratione composita ex dimidiata ratione lateris recti & integra
ratione temporis periodici.

Prop. XV. Theor. VII.

    _Iisdem positis, dico quod tempora periodica in Ellipsibus sunt in
    ratione sesquiplicata transversorum axium._

Namq; axis minor est medius proportionalis inter axem majorem (quem
transversum appello) & latus rectum, atq; adeo rectangulum sub axibus est
in ratione composita ex dimidiata ratione lateris recti & sesquiplicata
ratione axis transversi. Sed hoc rectangulum, per Corollarium Theorematis
Sexti, est in ratione composita ex dimidiata ratione lateris recti &
integra ratione periodici temporis. Dematur utrobiq; dimidiata ratio
lateris recti & manebit sesquiplicata ratio axis transversi æqualis rationi
periodici temporis.   _Q. E. D._

Corol. Sunt igitur tempora periodica in Ellipsibus eadem ac in circulis,
quorum diametri æquantur majoribus axibus Ellipseon.

Prop. XVI. Theor. VIII.

    _Iisdem positis, & actis ad corpora lineis rectis, quæ ibidem tangant
    orbitas, demissisq; ab umbilico communi ad has tangentes
    perpendicularibus: dico quod velocitates corporum sunt in ratione
    composita ex ratione perpendiculorum inverse & dimidiata ratione
    laterum rectorum directe._ Vide Fig. Prop. X. &. XI.

Ab umbilico S ad tangentem PR demitte perpendiculum SY & velocitas corporis
P erit reciproce in dimidiata ratione quantitatis SYq. ÷ L. Nam velocitas
illa est ut arcus quam minimus PQ in data temporis particula descriptus,
hoc est (per Lem. VII.) ut tangens PR, id est (ob proportionales PR ad QT &
SP ad SY) ut SP × QT ÷ SY, sive ut SY reciproce & SP × QT directe; estq; SP
× QT ut area dato tempore descripta, id est, per Theor. VI. in dimidiata
ratione lateris recti   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Latera recta sunt in ratione composita ex duplicata ratione
perpendiculorum & duplicata ratione velocitatum.

_Corol. 2._ Velocitates corporum in maximis & minimis ab umbilico communi
distantiis, sunt in ratione composita ex ratione distantiarum inverse &
dimidiata ratione laterum rectorum directe. Nam perpendicula jam sunt ipsæ
distantiæ.

_Corol. 3._ Ideoq; velocitas in Conica sectione, in minima ab umbilico
distantia, est ad velocitatem in circulo in eadem a centro distantia, in
dimidiata ratione lateris recti ad distantiam illam duplicatam.

_Corol. 4._ Corporum in Ellipsibus gyrantium velocitates in mediocribus
distantiis ab umbilico communi sunt eædem quæ corporum gyrantium in
circulis ad easdem distantias, hoc est (per Corol. VI. Theor. IV.)
reciproce in dimidiata ratione distantiarum. Nam perpendicula jam sunt
semi-axes minores, & hi sunt ut mediæ proportionales inter distantias &
latera recta. Componatur hæc ratio inverse cum dimidiata ratione laterum
rectorum directe, & fiet ratio dimidiata distantiarum inverse.

_Corol. 5._ In eadem vel æqualibus figuris, vel etiam in figuris
inæqualibus, quarum latera recta sunt æqualia, velocitas corporis est
reciproce ut perpendiculum demissum ab umbilico ad tangentem.

_Corol. 6._ In Parabola, velocitas est reciproce in dimidiata ratione
distantiæ corporis ab umbilico figuræ, in Ellipsi minor est, in Hyperbola
major quam in hac ratione. Nam (per Corol. 2 Lem. XIV.) perpendiculum
demissum ab umbilico ad tangentem Parabolæ est in dimidiata ratione
distantiæ.

_Corol. 7._ In Parabola, velocitas ubiq; est ad velocitatem corporis
revolventis in circulo ad eandem distantiam, in dimidiata ratione numeri
binarii ad unitatem; in Ellipsi minor est, in Hyperbola major quam in hac
ratione. Nam per hujus Corollarium secundum, velocitas in vertice Parabolæ
est in hac ratione, & per Corollaria sexta hujus & Theorematis quarti,
servatur eadem proportio in omnibus distantiis. Hinc etiam in Parabola
velocitas ubiq; æqualis est velocitati corporis revolventis in circulo ad
dimidiam distantiam, in Ellipsi minor est, in Hyperbola major.

_Corol. 8._ Velocitas gyrantis in Sectione quavis Conica est ad velocitatem
gyrantis in circulo in distantia dimidii lateris recti Sectionis, ut
distantia illa ad perpendiculum ab umbilico in tangentem Sectionis
demissum. Patet per Corollarium quintum.

_Corol. 9._ Unde cum (per Corol. 6. Theor. IV.) velocitas gyrantis in hoc
circulo sit ad velocitatem gyrantis in circulo quovis alio, reciproce in
dimidiata ratione distantiarum; fiet ex æquo velocitas gyrantis in Conica
sectione ad velocitatem gyrantis in circulo in eadem distantia, ut media
proportionalis inter distantiam illam communem & semissem lateris recti
sectionis, ad perpendiculum ab umbilico communi in tangentem sectionis
demissum.

Prop. XVII. Prob. IX.

    _Posito quod vis centripeta sit reciproce proportionalis quadrato
    distantiæ a centro, & quod vis illius quantitas absoluta sit cognita;
    requiritur linea quam corpus describit, de loco dato cum data
    velocitate secundum datam rectam egrediens._

[Illustration]

Vis centripeta tendens ad punctum S ea sit quæ corpus p in orbita quavis
data pq gyrare faciat, & cognoscatur hujus velocitas in loco p. De loco P
secundum lineam PR exeat corpus P cum data velocitate, & mox inde, cogente
vi centripeta, deflectat illud in Conisectionem PQ. Hanc igitur recta PR
tanget in P. Tangat itidem recta aliqua pr orbitam pq in p, & si ab S ad
eas tangentes demitti intelligantur perpendicula, erit (per Corol. 1.
Theor. VIII.) latus rectum Conisectionis ad latus rectum orbitæ datæ, in
ratione composita ex duplicata ratione perpendiculorum & duplicata ratione
velocitatum, atq; adeo datur. Sit istud L. Datur præterea Conisectionis
umbilicus S. Anguli RPS complementum ad duos rectos fiat angulus RPH, &
dabitur positione linea PH, in qua umbilicus alter H locatur. Demisso ad PH
perpendiculo SK, & erecto semiaxe conjugato BC, est SPq. - 2KPH + PHq. (per
Prop. 13. Lib. II. Elem.) = SHq. = 4CHq. = 4BHq. - 4BCq. = {SP + PH} quad.
- L × {SP + PH} = SPq. + 2SPH + PHq. - L × {SP + PH}. Addantur utrobiq;
2KPH + L × {SP + PH} - SPq. - PHq. & fiet L × {SP + PH} = 2SPH + 2KPH, seu
SP + PH ad PH ut 2SP + 2KP ad L. Unde datur PH tam longitudine quam
positione. Nimirum si ea sit corporis in P velocitas, ut latus rectum L
minus fuerit quam 2SP + 2KP, jacebit PH ad eandem partem tangentis PR cum
linea PS, adeoq; figura erit Ellipsis, & ex datis umbilicis S, H, & axe
principali SP + PH, dabitur: Sin tanta sit corporis velocitas ut latus
rectum L æquale fuerit 2SP + 2KP, longitudo PH infinita erit, & propterea
figura erit Parabola axem habens SH parallelum lineæ PK, & inde dabitur.
Quod si corpus majori adhuc cum velocitate de loco suo P exeat, capienda
erit longitudo PH ad alteram partem tangentis, adeoq; tangente inter
umbilicos pergente, figura erit Hyperbola axem habens principalem æqualem
differentiæ linearum SP & PH, & inde dabitur.   _Q. E. I._

_Corol. 1._ Hinc in omni Conisectione ex dato vertice principali D, latere
recto L, & umbilico S, datur umbilicus alter H capiendo DH ad DS ut est
latus rectum ad differentiam inter latus rectum & 4DS. Nam proportio SP +
PH ad PH ut 2SP ad L, in casu hujus Corollarii, fit DS + DH ad DH ut 4DS ad
L, & divisim DS ad DH ut 4DS - L ad L.

_Corol. 2._ Unde si datur corporis velocitas in vertice principali D,
invenietur Orbita expedite, capiendo scilicet latus rectum ejus, ad duplam
distantiam DS, in duplicata ratione velocitatis hujus datæ ad velocitatem
corporis in circulo ad distantiam DS gyrantis: (Per Corol. 3. Theor. VIII.)
dein DH ad DS ut latus rectum ad differentiam inter latus rectum & 4DS.

_Corol. 3._ Hinc etiam si corpus moveatur in Sectione quacunq; Conica, & ex
orbe suo impulsu quocunq; exturbetur; cognosci potest orbis in quo postea
cursum suum peraget. Nam componendo proprium corporis motum cum motu illo
quem impulsus solus generaret, habebitur motus quocum corpus de dato
impulsus loco, secundum rectam positione datam, exibit.

_Corol. 4._ Et si corpus illud vi aliqua extrinsecus impressa continuo
perturbetur, innotescet cursus quam proxime, colligendo mutationes quas vis
illa in punctis quibusdam inducit, & ex seriei analogia, mutationes
continuas in locis intermediis æstimando.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. IV.

_De Inventione Orbium Ellipticorum, Parabolicorum & Hyperbolicorum ex
umbilico dato._

[Illustration]

_Lemma XV._

    _Si ab Ellipseos vel Hyperbolæ cujusvis umbilicis duobus S, H, ad
    punctum quodvis tertium V inflectantur rectæ duæ SV, HV, quarum una HV
    æqualis sit axi transverso figuræ, altera SV a perpendiculo TR in se
    demisso bisecetur in T; perpendiculum illud TR sectionem Conicam
    alicubi tangit: & contra, si tangit, erit VH æqualis axi figuræ._

Secet enim VH sectionem conicam in R, & jungatur SR. Ob æquales rectas TS,
TV, æquales erunt anguli TRS, TRV. Bisecat ergo RT angulum VRS & propterea
figuram tangit: & contra.   _Q. E. D._

Prop. XVIII. Prob. X.

    _Datis umbilico & axibus transversis describere Trajectorias Ellipticas
    & Hyperbolicas, quæ transibunt per puncta data, & rectas positione
    datas contingent._

[Illustration]

Sit S communis umbilicus figuraram; AB longitudo axis transversi
Trajectoriæ cujusvis; P punctum per quod Trajectoria debet transire; & TR
recta quam debet tangere. Centro P intervallo AB - SP, si orbita sit
Ellipsis, vel AB + SP, si ea sit Hyperbola, describatur circulus HG. Ad
tangentem TR demittatur perpendiculum ST, & producatur ea ad V ut sit TV
æqualis ST; centroq; V & intervallo AB describatur circulus FH. Hac methodo
sive dentur duo puncta P, p, sive duæ tangentes TR, tr, sive punctum P &
tangens TR, describendi sunt circuli duo. Sit H eorum intersectio communis,
& umbilicis S, H, axe illo dato describatur Trajectoria. Dico factum. Nam
Trajectoria descripta (eo quod PH + SP in Ellipsi, & PH - SP in Hyperbola
æquatur axi) transibit per punctum P, & (per Lemma superius) tanget rectam
TR. Et eodem argumento vel transibit eadem per puncta duo P, p, vel tanget
rectas duas TR, tr.   _Q. E. F._

Prop. XIX. Prob. XI.

    _Circa datum umbilicum Trajectoriam Parabolicam describere, quæ
    transibit per puncta data, & rectas positione datas continget._

[Illustration]

Sit S umbilicus, P punctum & TR tangens trajectoriæ describendæ. Centro P,
intervallo PS describe circulum FG. Ab umbilico ad tangentem demitte
perpendicularem ST, & produc eam ad V, ut sit TV æqualis ST. Eodem modo
describendus est alter circulus fg, si datur alterum punctum p; vel
inveniendum alterum punctum v, si datur altera tangens tr; dein ducenda
recta IF quæ tangat duos circulos FG, fg si dantur duo puncta P, p; vel
transeat per duo puncta V, v, si dantur duæ tangentes TR, tr, vel tangat
circulum FG & transeat per punctum V, si datur punctum P & tangens TR. Ad
FI demitte perpendicularem SI, eamq; biseca in K, & axe SK, vertice
principali K describatur Parabola. Dico factum. Nam Parabola ob æquales SK
& IK, SP & FP transibit per punctum P; & (per Lemmatis XIV. Corol. 3.) ob
æquales ST & TV & angulum rectum STR, tanget rectam TR.   _Q. E. F._

Prop. XX. Prob. XII.

[Illustration]

    _Circa datum umbilicum Trajectoriam quamvis specie datam describere,
    quæ per data puncta transibit & rectas tanget positione datas._

_Cas. 1._ Dato umbilico S, describenda sit Trajectoria ABC per puncta duo
B, C. Quoniam Trajectoria datur specie, dabitur ratio axis transversi ad
distantiam umbilicorum. In ea ratione cape KB ad BS, & LC ad CS. Centris B,
C, intervallis BK, CL, describe circulos duos, & ad rectam KL, quæ tangat
eosdem in K & L, demitte perpendiculum SG, idemq; seca in A & a, ita ut sit
SA ad AG & Sa ad aG, ut est SB ad BK, & axe Aa, verticibus A, a,
describatur Trajectoria. Dico factum. Sit enim H umbilicus alter figuræ
descriptæ, & cum sit SA ad AG ut Sa ad aG, erit divisim Sa - SA seu SH ad
aG - AG seu Aa in eadem ratione, adeoq; in ratione quam habet axis
transversus figuræ describendæ ad distantiam umbilicorum ejus; & propterea
figura descripta est ejusdem speciei cum describenda. Cumq; sint KB ad BS &
LC ad CS in eadem ratione, transibit hæc Figura per puncta B, C, ut ex
Conicis manifestum est.

[Illustration]

_Cas. 2._ Dato umbilico S, describenda sit Trajectoria quæ rectas duas TR,
tr alicubi contingat. Ab umbilico in tangentes demitte perpendicula ST, St
& produc eadem ad V, v, ut sint TV, tv æquales TS, ts. Biseca Vv in O, &
erige perpendiculum infinite OH, rectamq; VS infinite productam seca in K &
k ita, ut sit VK ad KS & Vk ad kS ut est Trajectoriæ describendæ axis
transversus ad umbilicorum distantiam. Super diametro Kk describatur
circulus secans rectam OH in H; & umbilicis S, H, axe transverso ipsam VH
æquante, describatur Trajectoria. Dico factum. Nam biseca Kk in X, & junge
HX, HS, HV, Hv. Quoniam est VK ad KS ut Vk ad kS; & composite ut VK + Vk ad
KS + kS; divisimq; ut Vk - VK ad kS - KS id est ut 2VX ad 2KX & 2KX ad 2SX,
adeoq; ut VX ad HX & HX ad SX, similia erunt triangula VXH, HXS, &
propterea VH erit ad SH ut VX ad XH, adeoq; ut VK ad KS. Habet igitur
Trajectoria; descriptæ axis transversus VH eam rationem ad ipsius
umbilicorum distantiam SH, quam habet Trajectoriæ describendæ axis
transversus ad ipsius umbilicorum distantiam, & propterea ejusdem est
speciei. Insuper cum VH, vH æquentur axi transverso, & VS, vS a rectis TR,
tr perpendiculariter bisecentur, liquet, ex Lemmate XV, rectas illas
Trajectoriam descriptam tangere.   _Q. E. F._

[Illustration]

_Cas. 3._ Dato umbilico S describenda sit Trajectoria quæ rectam TR tanget
in puncto dato R. In rectam TR demitte perpendicularem ST, & produc eandem
ad V, ut sit TV æqualis ST. Junge VR, & rectam VS infinite productam seca
in K & k, ita ut sit VK ad SK & Vk ad Sk ut Ellipseos describendæ axis
transversus ad distantiam umbilicorum; circuloq; super diametro Kk
descripto, secetur producta recta VR in H, & umbilicis S, H, axe transverso
rectam HV æquante, describatur Trajectoria. Dico factum. Namq; VH esse ad
SH ut VK ad SK, atq; adeo ut axis transversus Trajectoriæ describendæ ad
distantiam umbilicorum ejus, patet ex demonstratis in Casu secundo, &
propterea Trajectoriam descriptam ejusdem esse speciei cum describenda:
rectam vero TR qua angulus VRS bisecatur, tangere Trajectoriam in puncto R,
patet ex Conicis.   _Q. E. F._

[Illustration]

_Cas. 4._ Circa umbilicum S describenda jam sit Trajectoria APB, quæ tangat
rectam TR, transeatq; per punctum quodvis P extra tangentem datum, quæq;
similis sit figuræ apb, axe transverso ab & umbilicis s, h descriptæ. In
tangentem TR demitte perpendiculum ST, & produc idem ad V, ut sit TV
æqualis ST. Angulis autem VSP, SVP fac angulos hsq, shq æquales; centroq; q
intervallo quod sit ad ab ut SP ad VS describe circulum secantem figuram
apb in p. Junge sp & age SH quæ sit ad sh ut est SP ad sp quæq; angulum PSH
angulo psh & angulum VSH angulo psq æquales constituat. Deniq; umbilicis S,
H, axe distantiam VH æquante, describatur sectio conica.

Dico factum. Nam si agatur sv quæ sit ad sp ut est sh ad sq, quæq;
constituat angulum vsp angulo hsq & angulum vsh angulo psq æquales,
triangula svh, spq erunt similia, & propterea vh erit ad pq ut est sh ad
sq, id est (ob similia triangula VSP, hsq) ut est VS ad SP seu ab ad pq.
Æquantur ergo vh & ab. Porro ob similia triangula VSH, vsh est VH ad SH ut
vh ad sh, id est, axis Conicæ actionis jam descripta: ad illius umbilicorum
intervallum, ut axis ab ad umbilicorum intervallum sh, & propterea figura
jam descripta similis est figuræ apb. Transit autem hæc figura per punctum
P, eo quod triangulum PSH simile sit triangulo psh; & quia VH æquatur
ipsius axi & VS bisecatur perpendiculariter a recta TR tangit eadem rectam
TR.   _Q. E. F._

Lemma XVI.

    _A datis tribus punctis ad quartum non datum inflectere tres rectas
    quarum differentiæ vel dantur vel nullæ sunt._

[Illustration]

_Cas. 1._ Sunto puncta illa data A, B, C & punctum quartum Z, quod invenire
oportet: Ob datam differentiam linearum AZ, BZ, locabitur punctum Z in
Hyperbola cujus umbilici sunt A & B, & axis transversus differentia illa
data. Sit axis ille MN. Cape PM ad MA ut est MN ad AB, & erecto PR
perpendiculari ad AB, demissoq; ZR perpendiculari ad PR, erit ex natura
hujus Hyperbolæ ZR ad AZ ut est MN ad AB. Simili discursu punctum Z
locabitur in alia Hyperbola, cujus umbilici sunt A, C & axis transversus
differentia inter AZ & CZ, duciq; potest QS ipsi AC perpendicularis, ad
quam si ab Hyperbolæ hujus puncto quovis Z demittatur normalis ZS, hæc
fuerit ad AZ ut est differentia inter AZ & CZ ad AC. Dantur ergo rationes
ipsarum ZR & ZS ad AZ, & idcirco datur earundem ZR & ZS ratio ad invicem;
adeoq; rectis RP, SQ concurrentibus in T, locabitur punctum Z in recta TZ
positione data. Eadem Methodo per Hyperbolam tertiam, cujus umbilici sunt B
& C & axis transversus differentia rectarum BZ, CZ, inveniri potest alia
recta in qua punctum Z locatur. Habitis autem duobus locis rectilineis,
habetur punctum quæsitum Z in earum intersectione,   _Q. E. I._

_Cas. 2._ Si duæ ex tribus lineis, puta AZ & BZ æquantur, punctum Z
locabitur in perpendiculo bisecante distantiam AB, & locus alius
rectilineus invenietur ut supra.   _Q. E. I._

_Cas. 3._ Si omnes tres æquantur, locabitur punctum Z in centro circuli per
puncta A, B, C transeuntis.   _Q. E. I._

Solvitur etiam hoc Lemma problematicum per Librum. Tactionum _Apollonii_ a
_Vieta_ restitutum.

Prop. XXI. Prob. XIII.

[Illustration]

    _Trajectoriam circa datum umbilicum describere, quæ transibit per
    puncta data & rectas positione datas continget._

Detur umbilicus S, punctum P, & tangens TR, & inveniendus sit umbilicus
alter H. Ad tangentem demitte perpendiculum ST, & produc idem ad Y, ut sit
TY æqualis ST, & erit YH æqualis axi transverso. Junge SP, HP & erit SP
differentia inter HP & axem transversum. Hoc modo si dentur plures
tangentes TR, vel plura puncta P, devenietur semper ad lineas totidem YH,
vel PH, a dictis punctis Y vel P ad umbilicum H ductas, quæ vel æquantur
axibus, vel datis longitudinibus SP differunt ab iisdem, atq; adeo quæ vel
æquantur sibi invicem, vel datas habent differentias; & inde, per Lemma
superius, datur umbilicus ille alter H. Habitis autem umbilicis una cum
axis longitudine (quæ vel est YH, vel si Trajectoria Ellipsis est, PH + SP;
sin Hyperbola PH - SP) habetur Trajectoria.   _Q. E. I._

_Scholium._

[Illustration]

Casus ubi dantur tria puncta sic solvitur expeditius. Dentur puncta B, C,
D. Junctas BC, CD produc ad E, F, ut sit EB ad EC ut SB ad SC, & FC ad FD
ut SC ad SD. Ad EF ductam & productam demitte normales SG, BH, inq; GS
infinite producta cape GA ad AS & Ga ad aS ut est HB ad BS; & erit A
vertex, & Aa axis transversus Trajectoriæ: quæ, perinde ut GA minor,
æqualis vel major fuerit quam AS, erit Ellipsis, Parabola vel Hyperbola;
puncto a in primo casu cadente ad eandem partem lineæ GK cum puncto A; in
secundo casu abeunte in infinitum; in tertio cadente ad contrariam partem
lineæ GK. Nam si demittantur ad GF perpendicula CI, DK, erit IC ad HB ut EC
ad EB, hoc est ut SC ad SB; & vicissim IC ad SC ut HB ad SB, seu GA ad SA.
Et simili argumento probabitur esse KD ad SD in eadem ratione. Jacent ergo
puncta B, C, D in Conisectione circa umbilicum S ita descripta, ut rectæ
omnes ab umbilico S ad singula Sectionis puncta ductæ, sint ad perpendicula
a punctis iisdem ad rectam GK demissa in data illa ratione.

Methodo haud multum dissimili hujus problematis solutionem tradit
Clarissimus Geometra _De la Hire_, Conicorum suorum Lib. VIII. Prop. XXV.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. V.

_Inventio orbium ubi umbilicus neuter datur._

_Lemma XVII._

[Illustration]

    _Si a datæ conicæ sectionis puncto quovis P, ad Trapezii alicujus ABCD,
    in Conica illa sectione inscripti, latera quatuor infinite producta AB,
    CD, AC, DB, totidem rectæ PQ, PR, PS, PT in datis angulis ducantur,
    singulæ ad singula: rectangulum ductarum ad opposita duo latera PQ ×
    PR, erit ad rectangulum ductarum ad alia duo latera opposita PS × PT in
    data ratione._

_Cas. 1._ Ponamus imprimis lineas ad opposita latera ductas parallelas esse
alterutri reliquorum laterum, puta PQ & PR lateri AC, & PS ac PT lateri AB.
Sintq; insuper latera duo ex oppositis, puta AC & BD, parallela. Et recta
quæ bisecat parallela illa latera erit una ex diametris Conicæ sectionis, &
bisecabit etiam RQ. Sit O punctum in quo RQ bisecatur, & erit PO ordinatim
applicata ad diametrum illam. Produc PO ad K ut sit OK æqualis PO, & erit
OK ordinatim applicata ad contrarias partes diametri. Cum igitur puncta A,
B, P & K sint ad Conicam sectionem, & PR secet AB in dato angulo, erit (per
Prop. 17 & 18 Lib. III _Apollonii_) rectangulum PQK ad rectangulum AQB in
data ratione. Sed QK & PR æquales sunt, utpote æqualium OK, OP, & OQ, OR
differentiæ, & inde etiam rectangula PQK & PQ × PR æqualia sunt; atq; adeo
rectangulum PQ × PR est ad rectangulum AQB, hoc est ad rectangulum PS × PT
in data ratione.   _Q. E. D._

[Illustration]

_Cas. 2._ Ponamus jam Trapezii latera opposita AC & BD non esse parallela.
Age Bd parallelam AC & occurrentem tum rectæ ST in t, tum Conicæ sectioni
in d. Junge Cd secantem PQ in r, & ipsi PQ parallelam age DM secantem Cd in
M & AB in N. Jam ob similia triangula BTt, DBN, est Bt seu PQ ad Tt ut DN
ad NB. Sic & Rr est ad AQ seu PS ut DM ad AN. Ergo ducendo antecedentes in
antecedentes & consequentes in consequentes, ut rectangulum PQ in Rr est ad
rectangulum Tt in PS, ita rectangulum NDM est ad rectangulum ANB, & (per
Cas. 1) ita rectangulum QPr est ad rectangulum SPt, ac divisim ita
rectangulum QPR est ad rectangulum PS × PT.   _Q. E. D._

[Illustration]

_Cas. 3._ Ponamus deniq; lineas quatuor PQ, PR, PS, PT non esse parallelas
lateribus AC, AB, sed ad ea utcunq; inclinatas. Earum vice age Pq, Pr
parallelas ipsi AC; & Ps, Pt parallelas ipsi AB; & propter datos angulos
triangulorum PQq, PRr, PSs, PTt, dabuntur rationes PQ ad Pq, PR ad Pr, PS
ad Ps & PT ad Pt, atq; adeo rationes compositæ PQ in PR ad Pq in Pr, & PS
in PT ad Ps in Pt. Sed per superius demonstrata, ratio Pq in Pr ad Ps in Pt
data est: Ergo & ratio PQ in PR ad PS in PT.   _Q. E. D._

_Lemma XVIII._

    _Iisdem positis, si rectangulum ductarum ad opposita duo latera
    Trapezii PQ × PR sit ad rectangulum ductarum ad reliqua duo latera PS ×
    PT in data ratione; punctum P, a quo lineæ ducuntur, tanget Conicam
    sectionem circa Trapezium descriptam._

[Illustration]

Per puncta A, B, C, D & aliquod infinitorum punctorum P, puta p, concipe
Conicam sectionem describi: dico punctum P hanc semper tangere. Si negas,
junge AP secantem hanc Conicam sectionem alibi quam in P si fieri potest,
puta in b. Ergo si ab his punctis p & b ducantur in datis angulis ad latera
Trapezii rectæ pq, pr, ps, pt & bk, b[r], b[s], bd; erit ut bk × b[r] ad bd
× b[s] ita (per Lemma XVII) pq × pr ad ps × pt & ita (per hypoth.) PQ × PR
ad PS × PT. Est & propter similitudinem Trapeziorum bkA[s], PQAS, ut bk ad
b[s] ita PQ ad PS. Quare applicando terminos prioris propositionis ad
terminos correspondentes hujus, erit b[r] ad bd ut PR ad PT. Ergo Trapezia
æquiangula D[r]bd, DRPT similia sunt, & eorum diagonales Db, DP propterea
coincidunt. Incidit itaq; b in intersectionem rectarum AP, DP adeoq;
coincidit cum puncto P. Quare punctum P, ubicunq; sumatur, incidit in
assignatam Conicam sectionem.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol._ Hinc si rectæ tres PQ, PR, PS a puncto communi P ad alias totidem
positione datas rectas AB, CD, AC, singulæ ad singulas, in datis angulis
ducantur, sitq; rectangulum sub duabus ductis PQ × PR ad quadratum tertii,
PS quad. in data ratione: punctum P, a quibus rectæ ducuntur, locabitur in
sectione Conica quæ tangit lineas AB, CD in A & C & contra. Nam coeat linea
BD cum linea AC manente positione trium AB, CD, AC; dein coeat etiam linea
PT cum linea PS: & rectangulum PS × PT evadet PS quad. rectæq; AB, CD quæ
curvam in punctis A & B, C & D secabant, jam Curvam in punctis illis
coeuntibus non amplius secare possunt sed tantum tangent.

_Scholium._

Nomen Conicæ sectionis in hoc Lemmate late sumitur, ita ut sectio tam
rectilinea per verticem Coni transiens, quam circularis basi parallela
includatur. Nam si punctum p incidit in rectam, qua quævis ex punctis
quatuor A, B, C, D junguntur, Conica sectio vertetur in geminas rectas,
quarum una est recta illa in quam punctum p incidit, & altera recta qua
alia duo ex punctis quatuor junguntur. Si trapezii anguli duo oppositi
simul sumpti æquentur duobus rectis, & lineæ quatuor PQ, PR, PS, PT
ducantur ad latera ejus vel perpendiculariter vel in angulis quibusvis
æqualibus, sitq; rectangulum sub duabus ductis PS × PR æquale rectangulo
sub duabus aliis PS × PT, Sectio conica evadet Circulus. Idem fiet si lineæ
quatuor ducantur in angulis quibusvis & rectangulum sub duabus ductis PQ ×
PR sit ad rectangulum sub aliis duabus PS × PT ut rectangulum sub sinubus
angulorum S, T, in quibus duæ ultimæ PS, PT ducuntur, ad rectangulum sub
sinubus angulorum Q, R, in quibus duæ primæ PQ, PR ducuntur. Cæteris in
casibus Locus puncti P erit aliqua trium figurarum quæ vulgo nominantur
Sectiones Conicæ. Vice autem Trapezii ABCD substitui potest quadrilaterum
cujus latera duo opposita se mutuo instar diagonalium decussant. Sed & e
punctis quatuor A, B, C, D possunt unum vel duo abire in infinitum, eoq;
pacto latera figuræ quæ ad puncta illa convergunt, evadere parallela: quo
in casu sectio conica transibit per cætera puncta, & in plagas parallelarum
abibit in infinitum.

Lemma XIX.

[Illustration]

    _Invenire punctum P, a quo si rectæ quatuor PQ, PR, PS, PT ad alias
    totidem positione datas rectas AB, CD, AC, BD singulæ ad singulas in
    datis angulis ducantur, rectangulum sub duabus ductis, PQ × PR, sit ad
    rectangulum sub aliis duabus, PS × PT, in data ratione._

Lineæ AB, CD, ad quas rectæ duæ PQ, PR, unum rectangulorum continentes
ducuntur, conveniant cum aliis duabus positione datis lineis in punctis A,
B, C, D. Ab eorum aliquo A age rectam quamlibet AH, in qua velis punctum P
reperiri. Secet ea lineas oppositas BD, CD, nimirum BD in H & CD in I, & ob
datos omnes angulos figuræ, dabuntur rationes PQ ad PA & PA ad PS, adeoq;
ratio PQ ad PS. Auferendo hanc a data ratione PQ × PR ad PS × PT, dabitur
ratio PR ad PT, & addendo datas rationes PI ad PR, & PT ad PH dabitur ratio
PI ad PH atq; adeo punctum P.   _Q. E. I._

_Corol. 1._ Hinc etiam ad Loci punctorum infinitorum P punctum quodvis D
tangens duci potest. Nam chorda PD ubi puncta P ac D conveniunt, hoc est,
ubi AH ducitur per punctum D, tangens evadit. Quo in casu, ultima ratio
evanescentium IP & PH invenietur ut supra. Ipsi igitur AD duc parallelam
CF, occurrentem BD in F, & in ea ultima ratione sectam in E, & DE tangens
erit, propterea quod CF & evanescens IH parallelæ sunt, & in E & P
similiter sectæ.

[Illustration]

_Corol. 2._ Hinc etiam Locus punctorum omnium P definiri potest. Per
quodvis punctorum A, B, C, D, puta A, duc Loci tangentem AE, & per aliud
quodvis punctum B duc tangenti parallelam BF occurrentem Loco in F.
Invenietur autem punctum F per Lemma superius. Biseca BF in G, & acta AG
diameter erit ad quam BG & FG ordinatim applicantur. Hæc AG occurrat Loco
in H, & erit AH latus transversum, ad quod latus rectum est ut BGq. ad AGH.
Si AG nullibi occurrit Loco, linea AH existente infinita, Locus erit
Parabola & latus rectum ejus BGq. ÷ AG. Sin ea alicubi occurrit, Locus
Hyperbola erit ubi puncta A & H sita sunt ad easdem partes ipsius G: &
Ellipsis, ubi G intermedium est, nisi forte angulus AGB rectus sit &
insuper BG quad. æquale rectangulo AGH, quo in casu circulus habebitur.

Atq; ita Problematis veterum de quatuor lineis ab _Euclide_ incæpti & ab
_Apollonio_ continuati non calculus, sed compositio Geometrica, qualem
Veteres quærebant, in hoc Corollario exhibetur.

Lemma XX.

    _Si parallelogrammum quodvis ASPQ angulis duobus oppositis A & P tangit
    sectionem quamvis Conicam in punctis A & P, & lateribus unius angulorum
    illorum infinite productis AQ, AS occurrit eidem sectioni Conicæ in B &
    C; a punctis autem occursuum B & C ad quintum quodvis sectionis Conicæ
    punctum D agantur rectæ duæ BD, CD occurrentes alteris duobus infinite
    productis parallelogrammi lateribus PS, PQ in T & R: erunt semper
    abscissæ laterum partes PR & PT ad invicem in data ratione. Et contra,
    si partes illæ abscissæ sunt ad invicem in data ratione, punctum D
    tanget Sectionem Conicam per puncta quatuor A, B, P, C transeuntem._

[Illustration]

_Cas. 1._ Jungantur BP, CP & a puncto D agantur rectæ duæ DG, DE, quarum
prior DG ipsi AB parallela sit & occurrat PB, PQ, CA in H, I, G; altera DE
parallela sit ipsi AC & occurrat PC, PS, AB in F, K, E: & erit (per Lemma
XVII.) rectangulum DE × DF ad rectangulum DG × DH in ratione data. Sed est
PQ ad DE seu IQ, ut PB ad HB, adeoq; ut PT ad DH; & vicissim PQ ad PT ut DE
ad DH. Est & PR ad DF ut RC ad DC, adeoq; ut IG vel PS ad DG, & vicissim PR
ad PS ut DF ad DG; & conjunctis rationibus fit rectangulum PQ × PR ad
rectangulum PS × PT ut rectangulum DE × DF ad rectangulum DG × DH, atq;
adeo in data ratione. Sed dantur PQ & PS & propterea ratio PR ad PT datur.
_Q. E. D._

_Cas. 2._ Quod si PR & PT ponantur in data ratione ad invicem, tunc simili
ratiocinio regrediendo, sequetur esse rectangulum DE × DF ad rectangulum DG
× DH in ratione data, adeoq; punctum D (per Lemma XVIII.) contingere
Conicam sectionem transeuntem per puncta A, B, P, C.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si agatur BC secans PQ in r, & in PT capiatur Pt in
ratione ad Pr quam habet PT ad PR, erit Bt Tangens Conicæ sectionis ad
punctum B. Nam concipe punctum D coire cum puncto B ita ut, chorda BD
evanescente, BT Tangens evadet; & CD ac BT coincident cum CB & Bt.

_Corol. 2._ Et vice versa si Bt sit Tangens, & ad quodvis Conicæ sectionis
punctum D conveniant BD, CD erit PR ad PT ut Pr ad Pt. Et contra, si sit PR
ad PT ut Pr ad Pt, convenient BD, CD ad Conicæ sectionis punctum aliquod D.

_Corol. 3._ Conica sectio non secat Conicam sectionem in punctis pluribus
quam quatuor. Nam, si fieri potest, transeant duæ Conicæ sectiones per
quinq; puncta A, B, C, D, P, easq; secet recta BD in punctis D, d, & ipsam
PQ secet recta Cd in r. Ergo PR est ad PT ut P[r] ad PT, hoc est, PR & P[r]
sibi invicem æquantur, contra Hypothesin.

Lemma XXI.

[Illustration]

    _Si recta duæ mobiles & infinitæ BM, CM per data puncta B, C, ceu polos
    ductæ, concursu suo M describant tertiam positione datam rectam MN; &
    aliæ duæ infinitæ rectæ BD, CD cum prioribus duabus ad puncta illa data
    B, C, datos angulos MBD, MCD efficientes ducantur; dico quod hæ duæ BD,
    CD concursu suo D describent sectionem Conicam. Et vice versa, si rectæ
    BD, CD concursu suo D describant Sectionem Conicam per puncta B, C, A
    transeuntem, & harum concursus tunc incidit in ejus punctum aliquod A,
    cum alteræ duæ BM, CM coincidunt cum linea BC, punctum M continget
    rectam positione datam._

Nam in recta MN detur punctum N, & ubi punctum mobile M incidit in immotum
N, incidat punctum mobile D in immotum P. Junge CN, BN, CP, BP, & a puncto
P age rectas PT, PR occurrentes ipsis BD, CD in T & R, & facientes angulum
BPT æqualem angulo BNM & angulum CPR æqualem angulo CNM. Cum ergo (ex
Hypothesi) æquales sint anguli MBD, NBP, ut & anguli MCD, NCP: aufer
communes NBD & MCP, & restabunt æquales NBM & PBT, NCM & PCR: adeoq;
triangula NBM, PBT similia sunt, ut & triangula NCM, PCR. Quare PT est ad
NM ut PB ad NB, & PR ad NM ut PC ad NC. Ergo PT & PR datam habent rationem
ad NM, proindeq; datam rationem inter se, atq; adeo, per Lemma XX, punctum
P (perpetuus rectarum mobilum BT & CR concursus) contingit sectionem
Conicam.   _Q. E. D._

Et contra, si punctum D contingit sectionem Conicam transeuntem per puncta
B, C, A, & ubi rectæ BM, CM coincidunt cum recta BC, punctum illud D
incidit in aliquod sectionis punctum A; ubi vero punctum D incidit
successive in alia duo quævis sectionis puncta p, P, punctum mobile M
incidit successive in puncta immobilia n, N: per eadem n, N agatur recta
nN, & hæc erit Locus perpetuus puncti illius mobilis M. Nam, si fieri
potest, versetur punctum M in linea aliqua curva. Tanget ergo punctum D
sectionem Conicam per puncta quinq; C, p, P, B, A, transeuntem, ubi punctum
M perpetuo tangit lineam curvam. Sed & ex jam demonstratis tanget etiam
punctum D sectionem Conicam per eadem quinq; puncta C, p, P, B, A,
transeuntem, ubi punctum M perpetuo tangit lineam rectam. Ergo duæ
sectiones Conicæ transibunt per eadem quinq; puncta, contra Corol. 3. Lem.
XX. Igitur punctum M versari in linea curva absurdum est.   _Q. E. D._

Prop. XXII. Prob. XIV.

    _Trajectoriam per data quinq; puncta describere._

[Illustration]

Dentur puncta quinq; A, B, C, D, P. Ab eorum aliquo A ad alia duo quævis B,
C, quæ poli nominentur, age rectas AB, AC hisq; parallelas TPS, PRQ per
punctum quartum P. Deinde a polis duobus B, C age per punctum quintum D
infinitas duas BDT, CRD, novissime ductis TPS, PRQ (priorem priori &
posteriorem posteriori) occurrentes in T & R. Deniq; de rectis PT, PR, acta
recta tr ipsi TR parallela, abscinde quasvis Pt, Pr ipsis PT, PR
proportionales, & si per earum terminos t, r & polos B, C actæ Bt, Cr
concurrant in d, locabitur punctum illud d in Trajectoria quæsita. Nam
punctum illud d (per Lem. XX) versatur in Conica Sectione per puncta
quatuor A, B, P, C transeunte; & lineis Rr, Tt evanescentibus, coit punctum
d cum puncto D. Transit ergo sectio Conica per puncta quinq; A, B, C, D, P.
_Q. E. D._

_Idem aliter._

[Illustration]

E punctis datis junge tria quævis A, B, C, & circum duo eorum B, C ceu
polos, rotando angulos magnitudine datos ABC, ACB, applicentur crura BA, CA
primo ad punctum D deinde ad punctum P, & notentur puncta M, N in quibus
altera crura BL, CL casu utroq; se decussant. Agatur recta infinita MN, &
rotentur anguli illi mobiles circum polos suos B, C, ea lege ut crurum BL,
CL vel BM, CM intersectio, quæ jam sit m, incidat semper in rectam illam
infinitam MN, & crurum BA, CA, vel BD, CD intersectio, quæ jam sit d,
Trajectoriam quæsitam PADdB delineabit. Nam punctum d per Lem. XXI
continget sectionem Conicam per puncta B, C transeuntem & ubi punctum m
accedit ad puncta L, M, N, punctum d (per constructionem) accedet ad puncta
A, D, P. Describetur itaq; sectio Conica transiens per puncta quinq; A, B,
C, D, P.   _Q. E. F._

_Corol. 1._ Hinc rectæ expedite duci possunt quæ trajectoriam in punctis
quibusvis datis B, C tangent. In casu utrovis accedat punctum d ad punctum
C & recta Cd evadet tangens quæsita.

_Corol. 2._ Unde etiam Trajectoriarum centra, diametri & latera recta
inveniri possunt, ut in Corollario secundo Lemmatis XIX.

_Schol._

Constructio in casu priore evadet paulo simplicior jungendo BP, & in ea si
opus est producta, capiendo Bp ad BP ut est PR ad PT, & per p agendo rectam
infinitam p[D] ipsi SPT parallelam, inq; ea capiendo semper p[D] æqualem
Pr, & agendo rectas B[D], Cr concurrentes in d. Nam cum sint Pr ad Pt, PR
ad PT, pB ad PB, p[D] ad Pt in eadem ratione, erunt p[D] & Pr semper
æquales. Hac methodo puncta Trajectoriæ inveniuntur expeditissime, nisi
mavis Curvam, ut in casu secundo, describere Mechanice.

Prop. XXIII. Prob. XV.

    _Trajectoriam describere quæ per data quatuor puncta transibit, &
    rectam continget positione datam._

_Cas. 1._ Dentur tangens HB, punctum contactus B, & alia tria puncta C, D,
P. Junge BC, & agendo PS parallelam BH, & PQ parallelam BC, comple
parallelogrammum BSPQ. Age BD secantem SP in T, & CD secantem PQ in R.
Deniq; agendo quamvis tr ipsi TR parallelam, de PQ, PS abscinde Pr, Pt
ipsis PR, PT proportionales respective; & actarum Cr, Bt concursus d (per
Corol. 2. Lem. XX) incidet semper in Trajectoriam describendam.

[Illustration]

_Idem aliter._

Revolvatur tum angulus magnitudine datus CBH circa polum B, tum radius
quilibet rectilineus & utrinq; productus DC circa polum C. Notentur puncta
M, N in quibus anguli crus BC secat radium illum ubi crus alterum BH
concurrit cum eodem radio in punctis D & P. Deinde ad actam infinitam MN
concurrant perpetuo radius ille CP vel CD & anguli crus CB, & cruris
alterius BH concursus cum radio delineabit Trajectoriam quæsitam.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Nam si in constructionibus Problematis superioris accedat punctum A ad
punctum B, lineæ CA & CB coincident, & linea AB in ultimo suo situ fiet
tangens BH, atq; adeo constructiones ibi positæ evadent eædem cum
constructionibus hic descriptis. Delineabit igitur cruris BH concursus cum
radio sectionem Conicam per puncta C, D, P transeuntem, & rectam BH
tangentem in puncto B.   _Q. E. F._

_Cas. 2._ Dentur puncta quatuor B, C, D, P extra tangentem HI sita. Junge
bina BD, CP concurrentia in G, tangentiq; occurrentia in H & I. Secetur
tangens in A, ita ut sit HA ad AI, ut est rectangulum sub media
proportionali inter BH & HD & media proportionali inter CG & GP, ad
rectangulum sub media proportionali inter PI & IC & media proportionali
inter DG & GB, & erit A punctum contactus. Nam si rectæ PI parallela HX
trajectoriam secet in punctis quibusvis X & Y: erit (ex Conicis) HA quad.
ad AI quad. ut rectangulum XHY ad rectangulum BHD (seu rectangulum CGP ad
rectangulum DGB) & rectangulum BHD ad rectangulum PIC conjunctim. Invento
autem contactus puncto A, describetur Trajectoria ut in casu primo.
_Q. E. F._   Capi autem potest punctum A vel inter puncta H & I, vel extra;
& perinde Trajectoria dupliciter describi.

Prop. XXIV. Prob. XVI.

    _Trajectoriam describere quæ transibit per data tria puncta & rectas
    duas positione datas continget._

[Illustration]

Dentur tangentes HI, KL & puncta B, C, D. Age BD tangentibus occurrentem in
punctis H, K & CD tangentibus occurrentem in punctis I, L. Actas ita seca
in R & S, ut sit HR ad KR ut est media proportionalis inter BH & HD ad
mediam proportionalem inter BK & KD; & IS ad LS ut est media proportionalis
inter CI & ID ad mediam proportionalem inter CL & LD. Age RS secantem
tangentes in A & P, & erunt A & P puncta contactus. Nam si A & P sint
Puncta contactuum ubivis in tangentibus sita, & per punctorum H, I, K, L
quodvis I agatur recta IY tangenti KL parallela & occurrens curvæ in X & Y,
& in ea sumatur IZ media proportionalis inter IX & IY: erit, ex Conicis,
rectangulum XIY (seu IZ quad.) ad LP quad. ut rectangulum CID ad
rectangulum CLD; id est (per constructionem) ut SI quad. ad SL quad. atq;
adeo IZ ad LP ut SI ad SL. Jacent ergo puncta S, P, Z in una recta. Porro
tangentibus concurrentibus in G, erit (ex Conicis) rectangulum XIY (seu IZ
quad.) ad IA quad. ut GP quad. ad GA quad., adeoq; IZ ad IA ut GP ad GA.
Jacent ergo puncta P, Z & A in una recta, adeoq; puncta S, P & A sunt in
una recta. Et eodem argumento probabitur quod puncta R, P & A sunt in una
recta. Jacent igitur puncta contactus A & P in recta SR. Hisce autem
inventis, Trajectoria describetur ut in casu primo Problematis superioris.
_Q. E. F._

Lemma XXII.

    _Figuras in alias ejusdem generis figuras mutare._

[Illustration]

Transmutanda sit figura quævis HGI. Ducantur pro lubitu rectæ duæ parallelæ
AO, BL tertiam quamvis positione datam AB secantes in A & B, & a figuræ
puncto quovis G, ad rectam AB ducatur GD, ipsi OA parallela. Deinde a
puncto aliquo O in linea OA dato ad punctum D ducatur recta OD, ipsi BL
occurrens in d; & a puncto occursus erigatur recta gd, datum quemvis
angulum cum recta BL continens, atq; eam habens rationem ad Od quam habet
GD ad OD; & erit g punctum in figura nova hgi puncto G respondens. Eadem
ratione puncta singula figuræ primæ dabunt puncta totidem figuræ novæ.
Concipe igitur punctum G motu continuo percurrere puncta omnia figuræ
primæ, & punctum g motu itidem continuo percurret puncta omnia figuræ novæ
& eandem describet. Distinctionis gratia nominemus DG ordinatam primam, dg
ordinatam novam; BD abscissam primam, Bd abscissam novam; O polum, OD
radium abscindentem, OA radium ordinatum primum & Oa (quo parallelogrammum
OABa completur) radium ordinatum novum.

Dico jam quod si punctum G tangit rectam lineam positione datam, punctum g
tanget etiam lineam rectam positione datam. Si punctum G tangit Conicam
sectionem, punctum g tanget etiam conicam sectionem. Conicis sectionibus
hic circulum annumero. Porro si punctum G tangit lineam tertii ordinis
Analytici, punctum g tanget lineam tertii itidem ordinis; & sic de curvis
lineis superiorum ordinum: Lineæ duæ erunt ejusdem semper ordinis Analytici
quas puncta G, g tangunt. Etenim ut est ad ad OA ita sunt Od ad OD, dg ad
DG, & AB ad AD; adeoq; AD æqualis est OA × AB ÷ ad & DG æqualis est OA × dg
÷ ad. Jam si punctum D tangit rectam lineam, atq; adeo in æquatione quavis,
qua relatio inter abscissam AD & ordinatam DG habetur, indeterminatæ illæ
AD & DG ad unicam tantum dimensionem ascendunt, scribendo in hac æquatione
OA × AB ÷ ad pro AD, & OA × dg ÷ ad pro DG, producetur æquatio nova, in qua
abscissa nova ad & ordinata noua dg ad unicam tantum dimensionem ascendent,
atq; adeo quæ designat lineam rectam. Sin AD & DG (vel earum alterutra)
ascendebant ad duas dimensiones in æquatione prima, ascendent itidem ad &
dg ad duas in æquatione secunda. Et sic de tribus vel pluribus
dimensionibus. Indeterminatæ ad, dg in æquatione secunda & AD, DG in prima
ascendent semper ad eundem dimensionum numerum, & propterea lineæ, quas
puncta G, g tangunt, sunt ejusdem ordinis Analytici.

Dico præterea quod si recta aliqua tangat lineam curvam in figura prima;
hæc recta translata tanget lineam curvam in figura nova: & contra. Nam si
Curvæ puncta quævis duo accedunt ad invicem & coeunt in figura prima,
puncta eadem translata coibunt in figura nova, atq; adeo rectæ, quibus hæc
puncta junguntur simul, evadent curvarum tangentes in figura utraq;.
Componi possent harum assertionum Demonstrationes more magis Geometrico.
Sed brevitati consulo.

Igitur si figura rectilinea in aliam transmutanda est, sufficit rectarum
intersectiones transferre, & per easdem in figura nova lineas rectas
ducere. Sin curvilineam transmutare oportet, transferenda sunt puncta,
tangentes & aliæ rectæ quarum ope Curva linea definitur. Inservit autem hoc
Lemma solutioni difficiliorum Problematum, transmutando figuras propositas
in simpliciores. Nam rectæ quævis convergentes transmutantur in parallelas,
adhibendo pro radio ordinato primo AO lineam quamvis rectam, quæ per
concursum convergentium transit; id adeo quia concursus ille hoc pacto abit
in infinitum, lineæ autem parallelæ sunt quæ ad punctum infinite distans
tendunt. Postquam autem Problema solvitur in figura nova, si per inversas
operationes transmutetur hæc figura in figuram primam, habebitur Solutio
quæsita.

Utile est etiam hoc Lemma in solutione Solidorum problematum. Nam quoties
duæ sectiones conicæ obvenerint, quarum intersectione Problema solvi
potest, transmutare licet unum earum in circulum. Recta item & sectio
Conica in constructione planorum problematum vertuntur in rectam &
circulum.

Prop. XXV. Prob. XVII.

    _Trajectoriam describere quæ per data duo puncta transibit & rectas
    tres continget positione datas._

[Illustration]

Per concursum tangentium quarumvis duarum cum se invicem, & concursum
tangentis tertiæ cum recta illa, quæ per puncta duo data transit, age
rectam infinitam; eaq; adhibita pro radio ordinato primo, transmutetur
figura, per Lemma superius, in figuram novam. In hac figura tangentes illæ
duæ evadent parallelæ, & tangens tertia fiet parallela rectæ per puncta duo
transeunti. Sunto hi, kl tangentes duæ parallelæ, ik tangens tertia, & hl
recta huic parallela transiens per puncta illa a, b, per quæ Conica sectio
in hac figura nova transire debet, & parallelogrammum hikl complens.
Secentur rectæ hi, ik, kl in c, d & e, ita ut sit hc ad latus quadratum
rectanguli ahb, ic ad id, & ke ad kd ut est summa rectarum hi & kl ad
summam trium linearum quarum prima est recta ik, & alteræ duæ sunt latera
quadrata rectangulorum ahb & alb: Et erunt c, d, e puncta contactus.
Etenim, ex Conicis, sunt hc quadratum ad rectangulum ahb, & ic quadratum ad
id quadratum, & ke quadratum ad kd quadratum, & el quadratum ad alb
rectangulum in eadem ratione, & propterea hc ad latus quadratum ipsius ahb,
ic ad id, ke ad kd & el ad latus quadratum ipsius alb sunt in dimidiata
illa ratione, & composite, in data ratione omnium antecedentium hi & kl ad
omnes consequentes, quæ sunt latus quadratum rectanguli ahb & recta ik &
latus quadratum rectanguli alb. Habentur igitur ex data illa ratione puncta
contactus c, d, e, in figura nova. Per inversas operationes Lemmatis
novissimi transferantur hæc puncta in figuram primam & ibi, per casum
primum Problematis XIV, describetur Trajectoria.   _Q. E. F._   Cæterum
perinde ut puncta a, b jacent vel inter puncta h, l, vel extra, debent
puncta c, d, e vel inter puncta h, i, k, l capi, vel extra. Si punctorum a,
b alterutrum cadit inter puncta h, l, & alterum extra, Problema impossibile
est.

Prop. XXVI. Prob. XVIII.

    _Trajectoriam describere quæ transibit per punctum datum & rectas
    quatuor positione datas continget._

Ab intersectione communi duarum quarumlibet tangentium ad intersectionem
communem reliquarum duarum agatur recta infinita, & eadem pro radio
ordinato primo adhibita, transmutetur figura (per Lem. XXII) in figuram
novam, & Tangentes binæ, quæ ad radium ordinatum concurrebant, jam evadent
parallelæ. Sunto illæ hi & kl, ik & hl continentes parallelogrammum hikl.
Sitq; p punctum in hac nova figura, puncto in figura prima dato respondens.
Per figuræ centrum O agatur pq, & existente Oq æquali Op erit q punctum
alterum per quod sectio Conica in hac figura nova transire debet. Per
Lemmatis XXII operationem inversam transferatur hoc punctum in figuram
primam, & ibi habebuntur puncta duo per quæ Trajectoria describenda est.
Per eadem vero describi potest Trajectoria illa per Prob. XVII.
_Q. E. F._

Lemma XXIII.

[Illustration]

    _Si rectæ duæ positione datæ AC, BD ad data puncta A, B terminentur,
    datamq; habeant rationem ad invicem, & recta CD, qua puncta
    indeterminata C, D junguntur secetur in ratione data in K: dico quod
    punctum K locabitur in recta positione data._

Concurrant enim rectæ AC, BD in E, & in BE capiatur BG ad AE ut est BD ad
AC, sitq; FD æqualis EG, & erit EC ad GD, hoc est ad EF ut AC ad BD, adeoq;
in ratione data, & propterea dabitur specie triangulum EFC. Secetur CF in L
in ratione CK ad CD, & dabitur etiam specie triangulum EFL, proindeq;
punctum L locabitur in recta EL positione data. Junge LK, & ob datam FD &
datam rationem LK ad FD, dabitur LK. Huic æqualis capiatur EH, & erit ELKH
parallelogrammum. Locatur igitur punctum K in parallelogrammi latere
positione dato HK.   _Q. E. D._

Lemma XXIV.

    _Si rectæ tres tangant quamcunq; conisectionem, quarum duæ parallelæ
    sint ac dentur positione; dico quod sectionis semidiameter hisce duabus
    parallela, sit media proportionalis inter harum segmenta, punctis
    contactum & tangenti tertiæ interjecta._

[Illustration]

Sunto AF, GB parallelæ duæ Conisectionem ADB tangentes in A & B; EF recta
tertia Conisectionem tangens in I, & occurrens prioribus tangentibus in F &
G; sitq; CD semidiameter Figuræ tangentibus parallela: Dico quod AF, CD, BG
sunt continue proportionales.

Nam si diametri conjugatæ AB, DM tangenti FG occurrant in E & H, seq; mutuo
secent in C, & compleatur parallelogrammum IKCL; erit ex natura sectionum
Conicarum, ut EC ad CA ita CA ad LC, & ita divisim EC - CA ad CA - CL seu
EA ad AL, & composite EA ad EA + AL seu EL ut EC ad EC + CA seu EB; adeoq;
(ob similitudinem triangulorum EAF, ELI, ECH, EBG) AF ad LI ut CH ad BG.
Est itidem ex natura sectionum Conicarum LI seu CK ad CD ut CD ad CH atq;
adeo ex æquo perturbate AF ad CD ut CD ad BG.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si tangentes duæ FG, PQ tangentibus parallelis AF, BG
occurrant in F & G, P & Q, seq; mutuo secent in O, erit (ex æquo
perturbate) AF ad BQ ut AP ad BG, & divisim ut FP ad GQ, atq; adeo ut FO ad
OG.

_Corol. 2._ Unde etiam rectæ duæ PG, FQ per puncta P & G, F & Q ductæ,
concurrent ad rectam ACB per centrum figuræ & puncta contactuum A, B
transeuntem.

Lemma XXV.

    _Si parallelogrammi latera quattuor infinite producta tangant sectionem
    quamcunq; Conicam & abscindantur ad tangentem quamvis quintam; sumantur
    autem abscisse terminate ad angulos oppositos parallelogrammi: dico
    quod abscissa unius lateris ad latus illud, ut pars lateris contermini
    inter punctum contactus & latus tertium, ad abscissam lateris hujus
    contermini._

[Illustration]

Tangant parallelogrammi MIKL latera quatuor ML, IK, KL, MI sectionem
Conicam in A, B, C, D, & secet tangens quinta FQ hæc latera in F, Q, H & E:
dico quod sit ME ad MI ut BK ad KQ & KH ad KL ut AM ad MF. Nam per
Corollarium Lemmatis superioris, est ME ad EI ut AM seu BK ad BQ, &
componendo ME ad MI ut BK ad KQ.   Q. E. D. Item KH ad HL ut BK seu AM ad
AF, & dividendo KH ad KL ut AM ad MF.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si parallelogrammum IKLM datur, dabitur rectangulum KQ ×
ME, ut & huic æquale rectangulum KH × MF. Æquantur enim rectangula illa ob
similitudinem triangulorum KQH, MFE.

_Corol. 2._ Et si sexta ducatur tangens eq tangentibus KI, MI occurrens in
e & q, rectangulum KQ × ME æquabitur rectangulo Kq × Me, eritq; KQ ad Me ut
Kq ad ME, & divisim ut Qq ad Ee.

_Corol. 3._ Unde etiam si Eq, eQ jungantur & bisecentur, & recta per puncta
bisectionum agatur, transibit hæc per centrum Sectionis Conicæ. Nam cum sit
Qq ad Ee ut KQ ad Me, transibit eadem recta per medium omnium Eq, eQ, MK;
(per Lemma XXIII) & medium rectæ MK est centrum Sectionis.

Prop. XXVII. Prob. XIX.

[Illustration]

    _Trajectoriam describere quæ rectas quinq; positione datas continget._

Dentur positione tangentes ABG, BCF, GCD, FDE, EA. Figuræ quadrilateræ sub
quatuor quibusvis contentæ ABFE diagonales AF, BE biseca, & (per Cor. 3.
Lem. XXV) recta per puncta bisectionum acta transibit per centrum
Trajectoriæ. Rursus figuræ quadrilateræ BGDF, sub alijs quibusvis quatuor
tangentibus contentæ, diagonales (ut ita dicam) BD, GF biseca, & recta per
puncta bisectionum acta transibit per centrum sectionis. Dabitur ergo
centrum in concursu bisecantium. Sit illud O. Tangenti cuivis BC parallelam
age KL, ad eam distantiam ut centrum O in medio inter parallelas locetur, &
acta KL tanget trajectoriam describendam. Secet hæc tangentes alias quasvis
duas CD, FDE in L & K. Per tangentium non parallelarum CL, FK cum
parallelis CF, KL concursus C & K, F & L age CK, FL concurrentes in R, &
recta OR ducta & producta secabit tangentes parallelas CF, KL in punctis
contactuum. Patet hoc per Corol. 2. Lem. XXIV. Eadem methodo invenire licet
alia contactuum puncta, & tum demum per Casum 1. Prob. XIV. Trajectoriam
describere.   _Q. E. F._

_Schol._

Problemata, ubi dantur Trajectoriarum vel centra vel Asymptoti includuntur
in præcedentibus. Nam datis punctis & tangentibus una cum centro, dantur
alia totidem puncta aliæq; tangentes a centro ex altera ejus parte
æqualiter distantes. Asymptotos autem pro tangente habenda est, & ejus
terminus infinite distans (si ita loqui fas sit) pro puncto contactus.
Concipe tangentis cujusvis punctum contactus abire in infinitum, & tangens
vertetur in Asymptoton, atq; constructiones Problematis XV & Casus primi
Problematis XIV vertentur in constructiones Problematum ubi Asymptoti
dantur.

[Illustration]

Postquam Trajectoria descripta est, invenire licet axes & umbilicos ejus
hac methodo. In constructione & Figura Lemmatis XXI, fac ut angulorum
mobilium PBN, PCN crura BP, CP quorum concursu Trajectoria describebatur
sint sibi invicem parallela, eumq; servantia situm revolvantur circa polos
suos B, C in figura illa. Interea vero describant altera angulorum illorum
crura CN, BN concursu suo K vel k, circulum IBKGC. Sit circuli hujus
centrum O. Ab hoc centro ad Regulam MN, ad quam altera illa crura CN, BN
interea concurrebant dum Trajectoria describebatur, demitte normalem OH
circulo occurrentem in K & L. Et ubi crura illa altera CK, BK concurrant ad
punctum istud K quod Regulæ proprius est, crura prima CP, BP parallela
erunt axi majori & perpendicularia minori; & contrarium eveniet si crura
eadem concurrunt ad punctum remotius L. Unde si detur Trajectoriæ centrum,
dabuntur axes. Hisce autem datis, umbilici sunt in promptu.



Axium vero quadrata sunt ad invicem ut KH ad LH, & inde facile est
Trajectoriam specie datam per data quatuor puncta describere. Nam si duo ex
punctis datis constituantur poli C, B, tertium dabit angulos mobiles PCK,
PBK. Tum ob datam specie Trajectoriam, dabitur ratio OH ad OK, centroq; O &
intervallo OH describendo circulum, & per punctum quartum agendo rectam quæ
circulum illum tangat, dabitur regula MN cujus ope Trajectoria describatur.
Unde etiam vicissim Trapezium specie datum (si casus quidam impossibiles
excipiantur) in data quavis sectione Conica inscribi potest.



Sunt & alia Lemmata quorum ope Trajectoriæ specie datæ, datis punctis &
tangentibus, describi possunt. Ejus generis est quod, si recta linea per
punctum quodvis positione datum ducatur, quæ datam Conisectionem in punctis
duobus intersecet, & intersectionum intervallum bisecetur, punctum
bisectionis tanget aliam Conisectionem ejusdem speciei cum priore, atq;
axes habentem prioris axibus parallelos. Sed propero ad magis utilia.

Lemma XXVI.

[Illustration]

    _Trianguli specie & magnitudine dati tres angulos ad rectas totidem
    positione datas, quæ non sunt omnes parallelæ, singulos ad singulas
    ponere._

Dantur positione tres rectæ infinitæ AB, AC, BC, & oportet triangulum DEF
ita locare, ut angulus ejus D lineam AB, angulus E lineam AC, & angulus F
lineam BC tangat. Super DE, DF & EF describe tria circulorum segmenta DRE,
DGF, EMF, quæ capiant angulos angulis BAC, ABC, ACB æquales respective.
Describantur autem hæc segmenta ad eas partes linearum DE, DF, EF ut literæ
DRED eodem ordine cum literis BACB, literæ DGFD eodem cum literis ABCA, &
literæ EMFE eodem cum literis ACBA in orbem redeant: deinde compleantur hæc
[Illustration] segmenta in circulos. Secent circuli duo priores se mutuo in
G, sintq; centra eorum P & Q. Junctis GP, PQ, cape Ga ad AB ut est GP ad
PQ, & centro G, intervallo Ga describe circulum, qui secet circulum primum
DGE in a. Jungatur tum aD secans circulum secundum DFG in b, tum aE secans
circulum tertium GEc in c. Et compleatur figura ABCdef similis & æqualis
figuræ abcDEF. Dico factum.

Agatur enim Fc ipsi aD occurrens in n. Jungantur aG, bG, PD, QD &
producatur PQ ad R. Ex constructione est angulus EaD æqualis angulo CAB, &
angulus EcF æqualis angulo ACB, adeoq; triangulum anc triangulo ABC
æquiangulum. Ergo angulus anc seu FnD angulo ABC, adeoq; angulo FbD æqualis
est, & propterea punctum n incidit in punctum b. Porro angulus GPQ, qui
dimidius est anguli ad centrum GPD, æqualis est angulo ad circumferentiam
GaD; & angulus GQR, qui dimidius est complementi anguli ad centrum GQD,
æqualis est angulo ad circumferentiam GbD, adeoq; eorum complementa PQG,
abG æquantur, suntq; ideo triangula GPQ, Gab similia, & Ga est ad ab ut GP
ad PQ; id est (ex constructione) ut Ga ad AB. Æquantur itaq; ab & AB, &
propterea triangula abc, ABC, quæ modo similia esse probavimus, sunt etiam
æqualia. Unde cum tangant insuper trianguli DEF anguli D, E, F trianguli
abc latera ab, ac, bc respective, compleri potest figura ABCdef figuræ
abcDEF similis & æqualis, atq; eam complendo solvetur Problema.
_Q. E. F._

_Corol._ Hinc recta duci potest cujus partes longitudine datæ rectis tribus
positione datis interjacebunt. Concipe Triangulum DEF, puncto D ad latus EF
accedente, & lateribus DE, DF in directum positis, mutari in lineam rectam,
cujus pars data DE, rectis positione datis AB, AC, & pars data DF rectis
positione datis AB, BC interponi debet; & applicando constructionem
præcedentem ad hunc casum solvetur Problema.

Prop. XXVIII. Prob. XX.

    _Trajectoriam specie & magnitudine datam describere, cujus partes datæ
    rectis tribus positione datis interjacebunt._

Describenda sit Trajectoria quæ sit similis & æqualis lineæ curvæ DEF,
quæq; a rectis tribus AB, AC, BC positione datis, in partes datis hujus
partibus DE & EF similes & æquales secabitur.

[Illustration]

Age rectas DE, EF, DF, & trianguli hujus DEF pone angulos D, E, F ad rectas
illas positione datas: (per Lem. XXVI) Dein circa triangulum describe
Trajectoriam curvæ DEF similem & æqualem.   _Q. E. F._

Lemma XXVII.

    _Trapezium specie datum describere cujus anguli ad rectas quatuor
    positione datas (quæ neq; omnes parallelæ sunt, neq; ad commune punctum
    convergunt) singuli ad singulas consistent._

[Illustration]

Dentur positione rectæ quatuor ABC, AD, BD, CE, quarum prima secet secundam
in A, tertiam in B, & quartam in C: & describendum sit Trapezium fghi quod
sit Trapezio FGHI simile, & cujus angulus f, angulo dato F æqualis, tangat
rectam ABC cæteriq; anguli g, h, i cæteris angulis datis G, H, I æquales
tangant cæteras lineas AD, BD, CE respective. Jungatur FH, & super FG, FH,
FI describantur totidem circulorum segmenta FSG, FTH, FVI; quorum primum
FSG capiat angulum æqualem angulo BAD, secundum FTH capiat angulum æqualem
angulo CBE; ac tertium FVI capiat angulum æqualem angulo ACE. Describi
autem debent segmenta ad eas partes linearum FG, FH, FI, ut literarum FSGF
idem sit ordo circularis qui literarum BADB, utq; literæ FTHF eodem ordine
cum literis CBEC, & literæ FVIF eodem cum literis ACEA in orbem redeant.
Compleantur segmenta in circulos, sitq; P centrum circuli primi FSG, & Q
centrum secundi FTH. Jungatur & utrinq; producatur PQ, & in ea capiatur QR
in ea ratione ad PQ quam habet BC ad AB. Capiatur autem QR ad eas partes
puncti Q ut literarum P, Q, R idem sit ordo circularis atq; literarum A, B,
C: centroq; R & intervallo RF describatur circulus quartus FNc secans
circulum tertium FVI in c. Jungatur Fc secans circulum primum in a &
secundum in b. Agantur aG, bH, cI, & figuræ abcFGHI similis constituatur
figura ABCfghi: Eritq; Trapezium fghi illud ipsum quod constituere
oportuit.

Secent enim circuli duo primi FSG, FTH se mutuo in K. Jungantur PK, QK, RK,
aK, bK, cK & producatur QP ad L. Anguli ad circumferentias FaK, FbK, FcK,
sunt semisses angulorum FPK, FQK, FRK ad centra, adeoq; angulorum illorum
dimidiis LPK, LQK, LRK æquales. Est ergo figura PQRK figuræ abcK æquiangula
& similis, & propterea ab est ad bc ut PQ ad QR, id est ut AB ad BC.
Angulis insuper FaG, FbH, FcI æquantur fAg, fBh, fCi per constructionem.
Ergo figuræ abcFGHI figura similis ABCfghi compleri potest. Quo facto
Trapezium fghi constituetur simile Trapezio FGHI & angulis suis f, g, h, i
tanget rectas AB, AD, BD, CE.   _Q. E. F._

_Corol._ Hinc recta duci potest cujus partes, rectis quatuor positione
datis dato ordine interjectæ, datam habebunt proportionem ad invicem.
Augeantur anguli FGH, GHI usq; eo, ut rectæ FG, GH, HI in directum jaceant,
& in hoc casu construendo Problema, ducetur recta fghi cujus partes fg, gh,
hi, rectis quatuor positione datis AB & AD, AD & BD, BD & CE interjectæ,
erunt ad invicem ut lineæ FG, GH, HI, eundemq; servabunt ordinem inter se.
Idem vero sic fit expeditius.

Producantur AB ad K, & BD ad L, ut sit BK ad AB ut HI ad GH; & DL ad BD ut
GI ad FG; & jungatur KL occurrens rectæ CE in i. Producatur iL ad M, ut sit
LM ad iL ut GH ad HI, & agatur tum MQ ipsi LB parallela rectæq; AD
occurrens in g, tum gi secans AB, BD in f, h. Dico factum.

[Illustration]

Secet enim Mg rectam AB in Q, & AD rectam KL in S, & agatur AP, quæ sit
ipsi BD parallela & occurrat iL in P, & erunt Mg ad Lh (Mi ad Li, gi ad hi,
AK ad BK) & AP ad BL in eadem ratione. Secetur DL in R ut sit DL ad RL in
eadem illa ratione, & ob proportionales gS ad gM, AS ad AP & DS ad DL, erit
ex æquo ut gS ad Lh ita AS ad BL & DS ad RL; & mixtim, BL - RL ad Lh - BL
ut AS - DS ad gS - AS. Id est BR ad Bh ut AD ad Ag, adeoq; ut BD ad gQ. Et
vicissim BR ad BD ut Bh ad gQ seu fh ad fg. Sed ex constructione est BR ad
BD ut FH ad FG. Ergo fh est ad fg ut FH ad FG. Cum igitur sit etiam ig ad
ih ut Mi ad Li, id est, ut IG ad IH, patet lineas FI, fi in g & h, G & H
similiter sectas esse.   _Q. E. F._

In constructione Corollarii hujus postquam ducitur LK secans CE in i,
producere licet iE ad V, ut sit EV ad iE ut FH ad HI, & agere Vf parallelam
ipsi BD. Eodem recidit si centro i, intervallo IH describatur circulus
secans BD in X, producatur iX ad Y, ut sit iY æqualis IF, & agatur Yf ipsi
BD parallela.

Prop. XXIX. Prob. XIX.

    _Trajectoriam specie datam describere, quæ a rectis quatuor positione
    datis in partes secabitur, ordine, specie & proportione datas._

[Illustration]

Describenda sit Trajectoria fghi, quæ similis sit lineæ curvæ FGHI, & cujus
partes fg, gh, hi illius partibus FG, GH, HI similes & proportionales,
rectis AB & AD, AD & BD, BD & EC positione datis, prima primis, secunda
secundis, tertia tertiis interjaceant. Actis rectis FG, GH, HI, FI,
describatur Trapezium fghi quod sit Trapezio FGHI simile & cujus anguli f,
g, h, i tangant rectas illas positione datas AB, AD, BD, CE singuli
singulas dicto ordine. Dein (per Lem. XXVII) circa hoc Trapezium
describatur Trajectoria curvæ lineæ FGHI consimilis.

_Scholium._

[Illustration]

Construi etiam potest hoc Problema ut sequitur. Junctis FG, GH, HI, FI
produc GF ad V, jungeq; FH, IG, & angulis FGH, VFH fac angulos CAK, DAL
æquales. Concurrant AK, AL cum recta BD in K & L, & inde aguntur KM, LN,
quarum KM constituat angulum AKM æqualem angulo GHI, sitq; ad AK ut est HI
ad GH; & LN constituat angulum ALN æqualem angulo FHI, sitq; ad AL ut HI ad
FH. Ducantur autem AK, KM, AL, LN ad eas partes linearum AD, AK, AL, ut
literæ CAKMC, ALK, DALND eodem ordine cum literis FGHIF in orbem redeant, &
acta MN occurrat rectæ CE in i. Fac angulum iEP æqualem angulo IGF, sitq;
PE ad Ei ut FG ad GI; & per P agatur QPf, quæ cum recta AED contineat
angulum PQE æqualem angulo FIG, rectæq; AB occurrat in f, & jungatur fi.
Agantur autem PE & PQ ad eas partes linearum CE, PE, ut literarum PEiP &
PEQP idem sit ordo circularis qui literarum FGHIF, & si super linea fi
eodem quoq; literarum ordine constituatur Trapezium fghi Trapezio FGHI
simile, & circumscribatur Trajectoria specie data, solvetur Problema.

Hactenus de orbibus inveniendis. Superest ut motus corporum orbibus
inventis determinemus.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. VI.

_De inventione motuum in Orbibus datis._

Prop. XXX. Prob. XXII.

[Illustration]

    _Corporis in data Trajectoria Parabolica moventis, invenire locum ad
    tempus assignatum._

Sit S umbilicus & A vertex principalis Parabolæ, sitq; 4AS × M area
Parabolica APS, quæ radio SP, vel post excessum corporis de vertice
descripta fuit, vel ante appulsum ejus ad verticem describenda est.
Innotescit area illa ex tempore ipsi proportionali. Biseca AS in G, erigeq;
perpendiculum GH æquale 3M, & circulus centro H, intervallo HS descriptus
secabit Parabolam in loco quæsito P. Nam demissa ad axem perpendiculari PO,
est HGq. + GSq. (= HSq. = HPq. = GOq. + {PO - HG}q.) = GOq. + HGq. - 2HG ×
PO + POq. Et deleto utrinq; HGq. fiet GSq. = GOq. - 2HG × PO + POq. seu 2HG
× PO (= GOq. + POq. - GSq. = AOq. - 2GAO + POq.) = AOq. + ¾POq. Pro AOq.
scribe AO × POq. ÷ 4AS, & applicatis terminis omnibus ad 3PO, ductisq; in
2AS, fiet 4/3GH × AS (= 1/6AO × PO + ½AS × PO = {AO + 3AS} ÷ 6 × PO = {4AO
- 3SO} ÷ 6 × PO = areæ APO - SPO) = areæ APS. Sed GH erat 3M, & inde 4/3HG
× AS est 4AS × M. Ergo area APS æqualis est 4AS × M.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Hinc GH est ad AS, ut tempus quo corpus descripsit arcum AP ad
tempus quo corpus descripsit arcum inter verticem A & perpendiculum ad axem
ab umbilico S erectum.

_Corol. 2._ Et circulo ASP per corpus movens perpetuo transeunte, velocitas
puncti H est ad velocitatem quam corpus habuit in vertice A, ut 3 ad 8;
adeoq; in ea etiam ratione est linea GH ad lineam rectam quam corpus
tempore motus sui ab A ad P, ea cum velocitate quam habuit in vertice A,
describere posset.

_Corol. 3._ Hinc etiam viceversa inveniri potest tempus quo corpus
descripsit arcum quemvis assignatum AP. Junge AP & ad medium ejus punctum
erige perpendiculum rectæ GH occurrens in H.

Lemma XXVIII.

    _Nulla extat figura Ovalis cujus area, rectis pro lubitu abscissa,
    possit per æquationes numero terminorum ac dimensionum finitas
    generaliter inveniri._

Intra Ovalem detur punctum quodvis, circa quod ceu polum revolvatur
perpetuo linea recta, & interea in recta illa exeat punctum mobile de polo,
pergatq; semper ea cum velocitate, quæ sit ut rectæ illius intra Ovalem
longitudo. Hoc motu punctum illud describet Spiralem gyris infinitis. Jam
si area Oualis per finitam æquationem inveniri potest, invenietur etiam per
eandem æquationem distantia puncti a polo; quæ huic areæ proportionalis
est, adeoq; omnia Spiralis puncta per æquationem finitam inveniri possunt:
& propterea rectæ cujusvis positione datæ intersectio cum spirali inveniri
etiam potest per æquationem finitam. Atqui recta omnis infinite producta
spiralem secat in punctis numero infinitis, & æquatio, qua intersectio
aliqua duarum linearum invenitur, exhibet earum intersectiones omnes
radicibus totidem, adeoq; ascendit ad tot dimensiones quot sunt
intersectiones. Quoniam circuli duo se mutuo secant in punctis duobus,
intersectio una non invenitur nisi per æquationem duarum dimensionum, qua
intersectio altera etiam inveniatur. Quoniam duarum sectionum Conicarum
quatuor esse possunt intersectiones, non potest aliqua earum generaliter
inveniri nisi per æquationem quatuor dimensionum, qua omnes simul
inveniantur. Nam si intersectiones illæ seorsim quærantur, quoniam eadem
est omnium lex & conditio, idem erit calculus in casu unoquoq; & propterea
eadem semper conclusio, quæ igitur debet omnes intersectiones simul
complecti & indifferenter exhibere. Unde etiam intersectiones Sectionum
Conicarum & curvarum tertiæ potestatis, eo quod sex esse possunt, simul
prodeunt per æquationes sex dimensionum, & intersectiones duarum curvarum
tertiæ potestatis, quia novem esse possunt, simul prodeunt per æquationes
dimensionum novem. Id nisi necessario fieret, reducere liceret Problemata
omnia Solida ad Plana, & plusquam solida ad solida. Eadem de causa
intersectiones binæ rectarum & sectionum Conicarum prodeunt semper per
æquationes duarum dimensionum; ternæ rectarum & curvarum tertiæ potestatis
per æquationes trium, quaternæ rectarum & curvarum quartæ potestatis per
æquationes dimensionum quatuor, & sic in infinitum. Ergo intersectiones
numero infinitæ rectarum, propterea quod omnium eadem est lex & idem
calculus, requirunt æquationes numero dimensionum & radicum infinitas,
quibus omnes possunt simul exhiberi. Si a polo in rectam illam secantem
demittatur perpendiculum, & perpendiculum una cum secante revolvatur circa
polum, intersectiones spiralis transibunt in se mutuo, quæq; prima erat seu
proxima, post unam revolutionem secunda erit, post duas tertia, & sic
deinceps: nec interea mutabitur æquatio nisi pro mutata magnitudine
quantitatum per quas positio secantis determinatur. Unde cum quantitates
illæ post singulas revolutiones redeunt ad magnitudines primas, æquatio
redibit ad formam primam, adeoq; una eademq; exhibebit intersectiones
omnes, & propterea radices habebit numero infinitas, quibus omnes exhiberi
possunt. Nequit ergo intersectio rectæ & spiralis per æquationem finitam
generaliter inveniri, & idcirco nulla extat Ovalis cujus area, rectis
imperatis abscissa, possit per talem æquationem generaliter exhiberi.

Eodem argumento, si intervallum poli & puncti, quo spiralis describitur,
capiatur Ovalis perimetro abscissæ proportionale, probari potest quod
longitudo perimetri nequit per finitam æquationem generaliter exhiberi.

_Corollarium._

Hinc area Ellipseos, quæ radio ab umbilico ad corpus mobile ducto
describitur, non prodit ex dato tempore, per æquationem finitam; &
propterea per descriptionem Curuarum Geometrice rationalium determinari
nequit. Curvas Geometrice rationales appello quarum puncta omnia per
longitudines æquationibus definitas, id est, per longitudinum rationes
complicatas, determinari possunt; cæterasq; (ut Spirales, Quadratrices,
Trochoides) Geometrice irrationales. Nam longitudines quæ sunt vel non sunt
ut numerus ad numerum (quemadmodum in decimo Elementorum) sunt Arithmetice
rationales vel irrationales. Aream igitur Ellipseos tempori proportionalem
abscindo per Curvam Geometrice irrationalem ut sequitur.

Prop. XXXI. Prob. XXIII.

    _Corporis in data Trajectoria Elliptica moventis invenire locum ad
    tempus assignatum._

[Illustration]

Ellipseos APB sit A vertex principalis, S umbilicus, O centrum, sitq; P
corporis locus inveniendus. Produc OA ad G ut sit OG ad OA ut OA ad OS.
Erige perpendiculum GH, centroq; O & intervallo OG describe circulum EFG, &
super regula GH, ceu fundo, progrediatur rota GEF revolvendo circa axem
suum, & interea puncto suo A describendo Trochoidem ALI. Quo facto, cape GK
in ratione ad rotæ perimetrum GEFG, ut est tempus quo corpus progrediendo
ab A descripsit arcum AP, ad tempus revolutionis unius in Ellipsi. Erigatur
perpendiculum KL occurrens Trochoidi in L, & acta LP ipsi KG parallela
occurret Ellipsi in corporis loco quæsito P.

Nam centro O intervallo OA describatur semicirculus AQB, & arcui AQ
occurrat LP producta in Q, junganturq; SQ, OQ. Arcui EFG occurrat OQ in F,
& in eandem OQ demittatur perpendiculum SR. Area APS est ut area AQS, id
est, ut differentia inter sectorem OQA & triangulum OQS, sive ut
differentia rectangulorum ½Q × AQ & ½OQ × SR, hoc est, ob datam ½OQ, ut
differentia inter arcum AQ & rectam SR, adeoq; (ob æqualitatem rationum SR
ad sinum arcus AQ, OS ad OA, OA ad OG, AQ ad GF, & divisim AQ - SR ad GF -
sin. arc. AQ) ut GK differentia inter arcum GF & sinum arcus AQ.
_Q. E. D._

_Scholium._

[Illustration]

Cæterum ob difficultatem describendi hanc curvam præstat constructiones
vero proximas in praxi Mechanica adhibere. Ellipseos cujusvis APB sit AB
axis major, O centrum, S umbilicus, OD semiaxis minor, & AK dimidium
lateris recti. Secetur AS in G, ut sit AG ad AS ut BO ad BS; & quæratur
longitudo L, quæ sit ad ½GK ut est AO quad. ad rectangulum AS × OD.
Bisecetur OG in C, centroq; C & intervallo CG describatur semicirculus GFO.
Deniq; capiatur angulus GCF in ea ratione ad angulos quatuor rectos, quam
habet tempus datum, quo corpus descripsit arcum quæsitum AP, ad tempus
periodicum seu revolutionis unius in Ellipsi: Ad AO demittatur normalis FE,
& producatur eadem versus F ad usq; N, ut sit EN ad longitudinem L, ut
anguli illius sinus EF ad radium CF; centroq; N & intervallo AN descriptus
circulus secabit Ellipsin in corporis loco quæsito P quam proxime.

Nam completo dimidio temporis periodici, corpus P semper reperietur in
Apside summa B, & completo altero temporis dimidio, redibit ad Apsidem
imam, ut oportet. Ubi vero proxime abest ab Apsidibus, ratio prima
nascentium sectorum ASP, GCF, & ratio ultima evanescentium BSP & OCF, eadem
est rationi Ellipseos totius ad circulum totum. Nam punctis P, F & N
incidentibus in loca p, f & n axi AB quam proximis; ob æquales An, pn,
recta nq, quæ ad arcum Ap perpendicularis est, adeoq; concurrit cum axe in
puncto K, bisecat arcum Ap. Proinde est ½Ap ad Gn ut AK ad GK, & Ap ad Gn
ut 2AK ad GK. Est & Gn ad Gf ut EN ad EF, seu L ad CF, id est, ut {GK ×
AOq.} ÷ {2AS × OD} ad CF, seu GK × AOq. ad 2AS × OD × CF, & ex æquo Ap ad
Gf ut 2AK ad GK + GK × AOq. ad 2AS × OD × CF, id est, ut AK × AOq. ad AS ×
OD × CF, hoc est, ob æqualia AK × AO × ODq. ut AO × OD ad AS × CF. Proinde
Ap × ½AS est ad Gf × ½GC ut AO × OD × AS ad AS × CF × GC, seu AO × OD ad
CGq. id est, sector nascens ASp ad sectorem nascentem GCf ut AO × OD ad
CGq. & propterea ut area Ellipseos totius ad aream circuli totius.
_Q. E. D._   Argumento prolixiore probari potest analogia ultima in
Sectoribus evanescentibus BSP, OCF: ideoq; locus puncti P prope Apsides
satis accurate inventus est. In quadraturis error quasi quingentesimæ
partis areæ Ellipseos totius vel paulo major obvenire solet: qui tamen
propemodum evanescet per ulteriorem Constructionem sequentem.

Per puncta G, O, duc arcum circularem GTO justæ magnitudinis; dein produc
EF hinc inde ad T & N ut sit EN ad FT ut ½L ad CF; centroq; N & intervallo
AN describe circulum qui secet Ellipsin in P, ut supra. Arcus autem GTO
determinabitur quærendo ejus punctum aliquod T; quod constructionem in illo
casu accuratam reddet.

Si Ellipseos latus transversum multo majus sit quam latus rectum, & motus
corporis prope verticem Ellipseos desideretur, (qui casus in Theoria
Cometarum incidit,) educere licet e puncto G rectam GI axi AB
perpendicularem, & in ea ratione ad GK quam habet area AVPS ad rectangulum
AK × AS; dein centro I & intervallo AI circulum describere. Hic enim
secabit Ellipsim in corporis loco quæsito P quamproxime. Et eadem
constructione (mutatis mutandis) conficitur Problema in Hyperbola. Hæ autem
constructiones demonstrantur ut supra, & si Figura (vertice ulteriore B in
infinitum abeunte) vertatur in Parabolam, migrant in accuratam illam
constructionem Problematis XXII.

[Illustration]

Si quando locus ille P accuratius determinandus sit, inveniatur tum angulus
quidam B, qui sit ad angulum graduum 57,29578 quem arcus radio æqualis
subtendit, ut est umbilicorum distantia SH ad Ellipseos diametrum AB; tum
etiam longitudo quædam L, quæ sit ad radium in eadem ratione inverse.
Quibus semel inventis, Problema deinceps confit per sequentem Analysin. Per
constructionem superiorem (vel utcunq; conjecturam faciendo) cognoscatur
corporis locus P quam proxime. Demissaq; ad axem Ellipseos ordinatim
applicata PR, ex proportione diametrorum Ellipseos, dabitur circuli
circumscripti AQB ordinatim applicata RQ, quæ sinus est anguli ACQ
existente AC radio. Sufficit angulum illum rudi calculo in numeris proximis
invenire. Cognoscatur etiam angulus tempori proportionalis, id est, qui sit
ad quatuor rectos ut est tempus quo corpus descripsit arcum AP, ad tempus
revolutionis unius in Ellipsi. Sit angulus iste N. Tum capiatur & angulus D
ad angulum B, ut est sinus iste anguli ACQ ad Radium, & angulus E ad
angulum N - ACQ + D, ut est longitudo L ad longitudinem eandem L cosinu
anguli ACQ + ½D diminutam, ubi angulus iste recto minor est, auctam ubi
major. Postea capiatur tum angulus F ad angulum B, ut est sinus anguli ACQ
+ E ad radium, tum angulus G ad angulum N - ACQ - E + F ut est longitudo L
ad Longitudinem eandem cosinu anguli ACQ + E + ½F diminutam ubi angulus
iste recto minor est, auctam ubi major. Tertia vice capiatur angulus H ad
angulum B, ut est sinus anguli ACQ + E + G ad radium; & angulus I ad
angulum N - ACQ - E - G + H, ut est longitudo L ad eandem longitudinem
cosinu anguli ACQ + E + G + ½H diminutam, ubi angulus iste recto minor est,
auctam ubi major. Et sic pergere licet in infinitum. Deniq; capiatur
angulus ACq æqualis angulo ACQ + E + G + I &c. & ex cosinu ejus Cr &
ordinata pr, quæ est ab sinum qr ut Ellipseos axis minor ad axem majorem,
habebitur corporis locus correctus p. Siquando angulus N - ACQ + D
negativus est, debet signum + ipsius E ubiq; mutari in -, & signum - in +.
Idem intelligendum est de signis ipsorum G & I, ubi anguli N - ACQ - E + F,
& N - ACQ - E - G + H negative prodeunt. Convergit autem series infinita
ACQ + E + G + I quam celerrime, adeo ut vix unquam opus fuerit ultra
progredi quam ad terminum secundum E. Et fundatur calculus in hoc
Theoremate, quod area APS sit ut differentia inter arcum AQ & rectam ab
umbilico S in Radium CQ perpendiculariter demissam.

[Illustration]

Non dissimili calculo conficitur Problema in Hyperbola. Sit ejus centrum C,
Vertex A, Umbilicus S & Asymptotos CK. Cognoscatur quantitas areæ APS
tempori proportionalis. Sit ea A, & fiat conjectura de positione rectæ SP,
quæ aream illam abscindat quamproxime. Jungatur CP, & ab A & P ad
Asymptoton agantur AI, PK Asymptoto alteri parallelæ, & per Tabulam
Logarithmorum dabitur Area AIKP, eiq; æqualis area CPA, quæ subducta de
triangulo CPS relinquet aream APS. Applicando arearum A & APS
semidifferentiam ½APS - ½A vel ½A - ½APS ad lineam SN, quæ ab umbilico S in
tangentem PT perpendicularis est, orietur longitudo PQ. Capiatur autem PQ
inter A & P, si area APS major sit area A, secus ad puncti P contrarias
partes: & punctum Q erit locus corporis accuratius. Et computatione
repetita invenietur idem accuratius in perpetuum.

Atq; his calculis Problema generaliter confit Analytice. Verum usibus
Astronomicis accommodatior est calculus particularis qui sequitur.
Existentibus AO, OB, OD semiaxibus Ellipseos, (_Vide fig. pag. 109. 110._)
& L ipsius latere recto, quære tum angulum Y, cujus Tangens sit ad Radium
ut est semiaxium differentia AO - OD ad eorum summam AO + OD; tum angulum
Z, cujus tangens sit ad Radium ut rectangulum sub umbilicorum distantia SH
& semiaxium differentia AO - OD ad triplum rectangulum sub OQ semiaxe
minore & AO - ¼L differentia inter semiaxem majorem & quartam partem
lateris recti. His angulis semel inventis, locus corporis sic deinceps
determinabitur. Sume angulum T proportionalem tempori quo arcus BP
descriptus est, seu motui medio (ut loquuntur) æqualem; & angulum V (primam
medii motus æquationem) ad angulum Y (æquationem maximam primam) ut est
sinus anguli T duplicati ad radium; atq; angulum X (æquationem secundam) ad
angulum Z (æquationem maximam secundam) ut est sinus versus anguli T
duplicati ad radium duplicatum, vel (quod eodem recidit) ut est quadratum
sinus anguli T ad quadratum Radii. Angulorum T, V, X vel summæ T + X + V,
si angulus T recto minor est, vel differentiæ T + X - V, si is recto major
est rectisq; duobus minor, æqualem cape angulum BHP (motum medium æquatum;)
& si HP occurrat Ellipsi in P, acta SP abscindet aream BSP tempori
proportionalem quamproxime. Hæc Praxis satis expedita videtur, propterea
quod angulorum perexiguorum V & X (in minutis secundis, si placet,
positorum) figuras duas tresve primas invenire sufficit. Invento autem
angulo motus medii æquati BHP, angulus veri motus HSP & distantia SP in
promptu sunt per methodum notissimam Dris. _Sethi Wardi_ Episcopi
_Salisburiensis_ mihi plurimum colendi.

Hactenus de motu corporum in lineis curvis. Fieri autem potest ut mobile
recta descendat vel recta ascendat, & quæ ad istiusmodi motus spectant,
pergo jam exponere.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. VII.

_De Corporum Ascensu & Descensu Rectilineo._

Prop. XXXII. Prob. XXIV.

[Illustration]

    _Posito quod vis centripeta sit reciproce proportionalis quadrato
    distantiæ locorum a centro, spatia definire quæ corpus recta cadendo
    datis temporibus describit._

_Cas. 1._ Si corpus non cadit perpendiculariter describet id sectionem
aliquam Conicam cujus umbilicus inferior congruit cum centro. Id ex
Propositionibus XI, XII, XIII & earum Corollariis constat. Sit sectio illa
Conica ARPB & umbilicus inferior S. Et primo si Figura illa Ellipsis est,
super hujus axe majore AB describatur semicirculus ADB, & per corpus
decidens transeat recta DPC perpendicularis ad axem; actisq; DS, PS erit
area ASD areæ ASP atq; adeo etiam tempori proportionalis. Manente axe AB
minuatur perpetuo latitudo Ellipseos, & semper manebit area ASD tempori
proportionalis. Minuatur latitudo illa in infinitum, & orbe APB jam
coincidente cum axe AB & umbilico S cum axis termino B, descendet corpus in
recta AC, & area ABD evadet tempori proportionalis. Dabitur itaq; spatium
AC, quod corpus de loco A perpendiculariter cadendo tempore dato describit,
si modo tempori proportionalis capiatur area ABD, & a puncto D ad rectam AB
demittatur perpendicularis DC.   _Q. E. I._

[Illustration]

_Cas. 2._ Sin figura superior RPB Hyperbola est, describatur ad eandem
diametrum principalem AB Hyperbola rectangula BD: & quoniam areæ CSP, CBfP,
SPfB sunt ad areas CSD, CBED, SDEB, singulæ ad singulas, in data ratione
altitudinum CP, CD; & area SPfB proportionalis est tempori quo corpus P
movebitur per arcum PB, erit etiam area SDEB eidem tempori proportionalis.
Minuatur latus rectum Hyperbolæ RPB in infinitum manente latere transverso,
& coibit arcus PB cum recta CB, & umbilicus S cum vertice B & recta SD cum
recta BD. Proinde area BDEB proportionalis erit tempori quo corpus C recto
descensu describit lineam CB.   _Q. E. I._

_Cas. 3._ Et simili argumento si figura RPB Parabola est, & eodem vertice
principali B describatur alia Parabola BED, quæ semper maneat data, interea
dum Parabola prior in cujus perimetro corpus P movetur, diminuto & in
nihilum redacto ejus Latere recto, conveniat cum linea CB, fiet segmentum
Parabolicum BDEB proportionale tempori quo corpus illud P vel C descendet
ad centrum B.   _Q. E. I._

Prop. XXXIII. Theor. IX.

    _Positis jam inventis, dico quod corporis cadentis velocitas in loco
    quovis C est ad velocitatem corporis centro B intervallo BC circulum
    describentis, in dimidiata ratione quam CA, distantia corporis a
    Circuli vel Hyperbolæ vertice ulteriore A, habet ad figuræ
    semidiametrum principalem ½AB._

[Illustration]

Namq; ob proportionales CD, CP, linea AB communis est utriusq; figuræ RPB,
DEB diameter. Bisecetur eadem in O, & agatur recta PT quæ tangat figuram
RPB in P, atq; etiam secet communem illam diametrum AB (si opus est
productam) in T; sitq; SY ad hanc rectam & BQ ad hanc diametrum
perpendicularis, atq; figuræ RPB latus rectum ponatur L. Constat per Cor.
9. Theor. VIII. quod corporis in linea RPB circa centrum S moventis
velocitas in loco quovis P sit ad velocitatem corporis intervallo SP circa
idem centrum circulum describentis in dimidiata ratione rectanguli ½L × SP
ad SY quadratum. Est autem ex Conicis ACB ad CPq. ut 2AO ad L, adeoq; 2CPq.
× AO ÷ ACB æquale L. Ergo velocitates illæ sunt ad invicem in dimidiata
ratione CPq. × AO × SP ÷ ACB ad SY quad. Porro ex Conicis est CO ad BO ut
BO ad TO, & composite vel divisim ut CB ad BT. Unde dividendo vel
componendo fit BO - uel + CO ad BO ut CT ad BT, id est AC ad AO ut CP ad
BQ; indeq; CPq. × AO × SP ÷ ACB æquale est BQq. × AC × SP ÷ {AO × BC}.
Minuatur jam in infinitum figuræ RPB latitudo CP, sic ut punctum P coeat
cum puncto C, punctumq; S cum puncto B, & linea SP cum linea BC, lineaq; SY
cum linea BQ; & corporis jam recta descendentis in linea CB velocitas fiet
ad velocitatem corporis centro B interuallo BC circulum describentis, in
dimidiata ratione ipsius BQq. × AC × SP ÷ {AO × BC} ad SYq. hoc est
(neglectis æqualitatis rationibus SP ad BC & BQq. ad SYq.) in dimidiata
ratione AC ad AO.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol._ Punctis B & S coeuntibus, fit TC ad ST ut AC ad AO.

Prop. XXXIV. Theor. X.

    _Si figura BED Parabola est, dico quod corporis cadentis velocitas in
    loco quovis C æqualis est velocitati qua corpus centro B dimidio
    intervalli sui BC circulum uniformiter describere potest._

[Illustration]

Nam corporis Parabolam RPB circa centrum S describentis velocitas in loco
quovis S (per Corol. 7. Theor. VIII) æqualis est velocitati corporis
dimidio intervalli SP circulum circa idem S uniformiter describentis.
Minuatur Parabolæ latitudo CP in infinitum eo, ut arcus Parabolicus PfB cum
recta CB, centrum S cum vertice B, & interuallum SP cum intervallo BP
coincidat, & constabit Propositio.   _Q. E. D._

Prop. XXXV. Theor. XI.

    _Iisdem positis, dico quod area figuræ DES, radio indefinito SD
    descripta, æqualis sit areæ quam corpus, radio dimidium lateris recti
    figuræ DES æquante, circa centrum S uniformiter gyrando, eodem tempore
    describere potest._

[Illustration]

Nam concipe corpus C quam minima temporis particula lineolam Cc cadendo
describere, & interea corpus aliud K, uniformiter in circulo OKk circa
centrum S gyrando, arcum Kk describere. Erigantur perpendicula CD, cd
occurrentia figuræ DES in D, d. Jungantur SD, SK, Sk & ducatur Dd axi AS
occurrens in T, & ad eam demittatur perpendiculum SY.

_Cas. 1._ Jam si figura DES Circulus est vel Hyperbola, bisecetur ejus
transversa diameter AS in O, & erit SO dimidium Lateris recti. Et quoniam
est TC ad TD ut Cc ad Dd, & TD ad TS ut CD ad SY, erit ex æquo TC ad TS ut
CD × Cc ad SY × Dd. Sed per Corol. Prop. 33. est TC ad ST ut AC ad AO, puta
si in coitu punctorum D, d capiantur linearum rationes ultimæ. Ergo AC est
ad AO, id est ad SK, ut CD × Cc ad SY × Dd. Porro corporis descendentis
velocitas in C est ad velocitatem corporis circulum intervallo SC circa
centrum S describentis in dimidiata ratione AC ad AO vel SK (per Theor.
IX.) Et hæc velocitas ad velocitatem corporis describentis circulum OKk in
dimidiata ratione SK ad SC per Cor. 6. Theor. IV. & ex æquo velocitas prima
ad ultimam, hoc est lineola Cc ad arcum Kk in dimidiata ratione AC ad SC,
id est in ratione AC ad CD. Quare est CD × Cc æquale AC × Kk, & propterea
AC ad SK ut AC × Kk ad SY × Dd, indeq; SK × Kk æquale SY × Dd, & ½SK × Kk
æquale ½SY × Dd, id est area KSk æqualis areæ SDd. Singulis igitur temporis
particulis generantur arearum duarum particulæ KSk, SDd, quæ, si magnitudo
earum minuatur & numerus augeatur in infinitum, rationem obtinent
æqualitatis, & propterea (per Corollarium Lemmatis IV) areæ totæ simul
genitæ sunt semper æquales.   _Q. E. D._

[Illustration]

_Cas. 2._ Quod si figura DES Parabola sit, invenietur ut supra CD × Cc esse
ad SY × Dd ut TC ad ST, hoc est ut 2 ad 1, adeoq; ¼CD × Cc æqualem esse ½SY
× Dd. Sed corporis cadentis velocitas in C æqualis est velocitati qua
circulus intervallo ½SC uniformiter describi possit (per Theor. X.) Et hæc
velocitas ad velocitatem qua circulus radio SK describi possit, hoc est,
lineola Cc ad arcum Kk est in dimidiata ratione SK ad ½Sc, id est, in
ratione SK ad ½CD, per Corol. 6. Theorem. IV. Quare est ½SK × Kk æquale ¼CD
× Cc, adeoq; æquale ½SY × Dd, hoc est, area KSk æqualis Areæ SDd, ut supra.
_Quod erat demonstrandum._

Prop. XXXVI. Prob. XXV.

[Illustration]

    _Corporis de loco dato A cadentis determinare tempora descensus._

Super diametro AS (distantia corporis a centro sub initio) describe
semicirculum ADS, ut & huic æqualem semicirculum OKH circa centrum S. De
corporis loco quovis C erige ordinatim applicatam CD. Junge SD, & areæ ASD
æqualem constitue Sectionem OSK. Patet per Theor. XI, quod corpus cadendo
describet spatium AC eodem tempore quo corpus aliud uniformiter circa
centrum S gyrando, describere potest arcum OK. _Quod erat faciendum._

Prop. XXXVII. Prob. XXVI.

    _Corporis de loco dato sursum vel deorsum projecti definire tempora
    ascensus vel descensus._

[Illustration]

Exeat corpus de loco dato G secundum lineam ASG cum velocitate quacunq;. In
duplicata ratione hujus velocitatis ad uniformem in circulo velocitatem,
qua corpus ad intervallum datum SG circa centrum S revolvi posset, cape CA
ad ½AS. Si ratio illa est numeri binarii ad unitatem, punctum A cadet ad
infinitam distantiam, quo in casu Parabola uertice S, axe SC, latere quovis
recto describenda est. Patet hoc per Theorema X. Sin ratio illa minor vel
major est quam 2 ad 1, priore casu Circulus, posteriore Hyperbola
rectangula super diametro SA describi debet. Patet per Theorema IX. Tum
centro S, intervallo æquante dimidium lateris recti, describatur circulus
HKk, & ad corporis ascendentis vel descendentis loca duo quævis G, C,
erigantur perpendicula GI, CD occurrentia Conicæ Sectioni vel circulo in I
ac D. Dein junctis SI, SD, fiant segmentis SEIS, SEDS Sectores HSK, HSk
æquales, & per Theorema XI. corpus G describet spatium GC eodem tempore quo
corpus K describere potest arcum Kk.   Q. E. F.

Prop. XXXVIII. Theor. XII.

    _Posito quod vis centripeta proportionalis sit altitudini seu distantiæ
    locorum a centro, dico quod cadentium tempora, velocitates & spatia
    descripta sunt arcubus arcuumq; sinibus versis & sinibus rectis
    respective proportionales._

[Illustration]

Cadat corpus de loco quovis A secundum rectam AS; & centro virium S,
intervallo AS, describatur circuli quadrans AE, sitq; CD sinus rectus arcus
cujusvis AD, & corpus A, tempore AD, cadendo describet spatium AC, inq;
loco C acquisierit velocitatem CD. Demonstratur eodem modo ex Propositione
X. quo Propositio XXXII. ex Propositione XI. demonstrata fuit.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc æqualia sunt tempora quibus corpus unum de loco A cadendo
provenit ad centrum S, & corpus aliud revolvendo describit arcum
quadrantalem ADE.

_Corol. 2._ Proinde æqualia sunt tempora omnia quibus corpora de locis
quibusvis ad usq; centrum cadunt. Nam revolventium tempora omnia periodica
(per Corol. 3. Prop. IV.) æquantur.

Prop. XXXIX. Prob. XXVII.

    _Posita cujuscunq; generis vi centripeta, & concessis figurarum
    curvilinearum quadraturis, requiritur corporis recta ascendentis vel
    descendentis tum velocitas in locis singulis, tum tempus quo corpus ad
    locum quemvis perveniet: Et contra._

[Illustration]

De loco quovis A in recta ADEC cadat corpus E, deq; loco ejus E erigatur
semper perpendicularis EG, vi centripetæ in loco illo ad centrum C tendenti
proportionalis: Sitq; BFG linea curva quam punctum G perpetuo tangit.
Coincidat autem EG ipso motus initio cum perpendiculari AB, & erit corporis
velocitas in loco quovis E ut areæ curvilineæ ABGE latus quadratum.
_Q. E. I._   In EG capiatur EM lateri quadrato areæ ABGE reciproce
proportionalis, & sit ALM linea curva quam punctum M perpetuo tangit, &
erit tempus quo corpus cadendo describit lineam AE ut area curvilinea ALME.
_Quod erat Inveniendum._

Etenim in recta AE capiatur linea quam minima DE datæ longitudinis, sitq;
DLF locus lineæ EMG ubi corpus versabatur in D; & si ea sit vis centripeta,
ut area ABGE latus quadratum sit ut descendentis velocitas, erit area ipsa
in duplicata ratione velocitatis, id est, si pro velocitatibus in D & E
scribantur V & V + I, erit area ABFD ut V^2, & area ABGE ut V^2 + 2VI +
I^2, & divisim area DFGE ut 2VI + I^2, adeoq; DFGE ÷ DE ut {2I × V + ½I} ÷
DE, id est, si primæ quantitatum nascentium rationes sumantur, longitudo DF
ut quantitas 2I × V ÷ DE, adeoq; etiam ut quantitatis hujus dimidium I × V
÷ DE. Est autem tempus quo corpus cadendo describit lineolam DE, ut lineola
illa directe & velocitas V inverse, estq; vis ut velocitatis incrementum I
directe & tempus inverse, adeoq; si primæ nascentium rationes sumantur, ut
I × V ÷ DE, hoc est, ut longitudo DF. Ergo vis ipsi DF vel EG
proportionalis facit corpus ea cum velocitate descendere quæ sit ut areæ
ABGE latus quadratum.   Q. E. D.

Porro cum tempus, quo quælibet longitudinis datæ lineola DE describatur,
sit ut velocitas, adeoq; ut areæ ABFD latus quadratum inverse; sitq; DL,
atq; adeo areæ nascens DLME, ut idem latus quadratum inverse: erit tempus
ut area DLME, & summa omnium temporum ut summa omnium arearum, hoc est (per
Corol. Lem. IV.) tempus totum quo linea AE describitur ut area tota AME.
Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Si P sit locus de quo corpus cadere debet, ut, urgente aliqua
uniformi ui centripeta nota (qualis vulgo supponitur gravitas) velocitatem
acquirat in loco D æqualem velocitati quam corpus aliud vi quacunq; cadens
acquisivit eodem loco D, & in perpendiculari DF capiatur DR, quæ sit ad DF
ut vis illa uniformis ad vim alteram in loco D, & compleatur rectangulum
PDRQ, eiq; æqualis abscindatur area ABFD; erit A locus de quo corpus
alterum cecidit. Namq; completo rectangulo EDRS, cum sit area ABFD ad aream
DFGE ut VV ad 2V × I, adeoq; ut ½V ad I, id est, ut semissis velocitatis
totius ad incrementum velocitatis corporis vi inæquabili cadentis; &
similiter area PQRD ad aream DRSE ut semissis velocitatis totius ad
incrementum velocitatis corporis uniformi vi cadentis; sintq; incrementa
illa (ob æqualitatem temporum nascentium) ut vires generatrices, id est ut
ordinatim applicatæ DF, DR, adeoq; ut areæ nascentes DFGE, DRSE; erunt (ex
æquo) areæ totæ ABFD, PQRD ad invicem ut semisses totarum velocitatum, &
propterea (ob æqualitatem velocitatum) æquantur.

_Corol. 2._ Unde si corpus quodlibet de loco quocunq; D data cum velocitate
vel sursum vel deorsum projiciatur, & detur lex vis centripetæ, invenietur
velocitas ejus in alio quovis loco e, erigendo ordinatam eg, & capiendo
velocitatem illam ad velocitatem in loco D ut est latus quadratum
rectanguli PQRD area curvilinea DFge vel aucti, si locus e est loco D
inferior, vel diminuti, si is superior est, ad latus quadratum rectanguli
solius PQRD, id est ut [sqrt]{PQRD + vel - DFge} ad [sqrt]PQRD.

_Corol. 3._ Tempus quoq; innotescet erigendo ordinatam em reciproce
proportionalem lateri quadrato ex PQRD + vel - DFge, & capiendo tempus quo
corpus descripsit lineam De ad tempus quo corpus alterum vi uniformi
cecidit a P & cadendo pervenit ad D, ut area curvilinea DLme ad rectangulum
2PD × DL. Namq; tempus quo corpus vi uniformi descendens descripsit lineam
PD est ad tempus quo corpus idem descripsit lineam PE in dimidiata ratione
PD ad PE, id est (lineola DE jamjam nascente) in ratione PD ad PD + ½DE seu
2PD ad 2PD + DE, & divisim, ad tempus quo corpus idem descripsit lineolam
DE ut 2PD ad DE, adeoq; ut rectangulum 2PE × DL ad aream DLME; estq; tempus
quo corpus utrumq; descripsit lineolam DE ad tempus quo corpus alterum
inæquabili motu descripsit lineam De ut area DLME ad aream DLme, & ex æquo
tempus primum ad tempus ultimum ut rectangulum 2PD × DL ad aream DLme.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. VIII.

_De Inventione Orbium in quibus corpora viribus quibuscunq; centripetis
agitata revolventur._

Prop. XL. Theor. XIII.

    _Si corpus, cogente vi quacunq; centripeta, moveatur utcunq;, & corpus
    aliud recta ascendat vel descendat, sintq; eorum velocitates in aliquo
    æqualium altitudinum casu æquales, velocitates eorum in omnibus
    æqualibus altitudinibus erunt æquales._

[Illustration]

Descendat corpus aliquod ab A per D, E, ad centrum C, & moveatur corpus
aliud a V in linea curva VIKk. Centro C intervallis quibusvis describantur
circuli concentrici DI, EK rectæ AC in D & E, curvæq; VIK in I & K
occurrentes. Jungatur IC occurrens ipsi KE in N; & in IK demittatur
perpendiculum NT; sitq; circumferentiarum circulorum intervallum DE vel IN
quam minimum, & habeant corpora in D & I velocitates æquales. Quoniam
distantiæ CD, CI æquantur, erunt vires centripetæ in D & I æquales.
Exponantur hæ vires per æquales lineolas DE, IN; & si vis una IN, per Legum
Corol. 2. resolvatur in duas NT & IT, vis NT, agendo secundum lineam NT
corporis cursui ITK perpendicularem, nil mutabit velocitatem corporis in
cursu illo, sed retrahet solummodo corpus a cursu rectilineo, facietq;
ipsum de Orbis tangente perpetuo deflectere, inq; via curvilinea ITKk,
progredi. In hoc effectu producendo vis illa tota consumetur: vis autem
altera IT, secundum corporis cursum agendo, tota accelerabit illud, ac dato
tempore quam minimo accelerationem generabit sibi ipsi proportionalem.
Proinde corporum in D & I accelerationes æqualibus temporibus factæ (si
sumantur linearum nascentium DE, IN, IK, IT, NT rationes primæ) sunt ut
lineæ DE, IT: temporibus autem inæqualibus ut lineæ illæ & tempora
conjunctim. Tempora ob æqualitatem velocitatum sunt ut viæ descriptæ DE &
IK, adeoq; accelerationes, in cursu corporum per lineas DE & IK, sunt ut DE
& IT, DE & IK conjunctim, id est ut DE quad. & IT × IK rectangulum. Sed
rectangulum IT × IK æquale est IN quadrato, hoc est, æquale DE quadrato &
propterea accelerationes in transitu corporum a D & I ad E & K æquales
generantur. Æquales igitur sunt corporum velocitates in E & K & eodem
argumento semper reperientur æquales in subsequentibus æqualibus
distantiis.   Q. E. D.   Sed & eodem argumento corpora æquivelocia &
æqualiter a centro distantia, in ascensu ad æquales distantias æqualiter
retardabuntur.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si corpus vel funipendulum oscilletur, vel impedimento
quovis politissimo & perfecte lubrico cogatur in linea curva moveri, &
corpus aliud recta ascendat vel descendat, sintq; velocitates eorum in
eadem quacunq; altitudine æquales: erunt velocitates eorum in aliis
quibuscunq; æqualibus altitudinibus æquales. Namq; impedimento vasis
absolute lubrici idem præstatur quod vi transversa NT. Corpus eo non
retardatur, non acceleratur, sed tantum cogitur de cursu rectilineo
discedere.

_Corol. 2._ Hinc etiam si quantitas P sit maxima a centro distantia, ad
quam corpus vel oscillans vel in Trajectoria quacunq; revolvens, deq;
quovis trajectoriæ puncto, ea quam ibi habet velocitate sursum projectum
ascendere possit; sitq; quantitas A distantia corporis a centro in alio
quovis Orbis puncto, & vis centripeta semper sit ut ipsius A dignitas
quælibet A^{n - 1}, cujus Index n - 1 est numerus quilibet n unitate
diminutus; velocitas corporis in omni altitudine A erit ut [sqrt]{nP^n -
nA^n}, atq; adeo datur. Namq; velocitas ascendentis ac descendentis (per
Prop. XXXIX.) est in hac ipsa ratione.

Prop. XLI. Prob. XXVIII.

    _Posita cujuscunq; generis vi centripeta & concessis figurarum
    curvilinearum quadraturis, requiruntur tum Trajectoriæ in quibus
    corpora movebuntur, tum tempora motuum in Trajectoriis inventis._

[Illustration]

Tendat vis quælibet ad centrum C & invenienda sit Trajectoria VITKk. Detur
circulus VXY centro C intervallo quovis CV descriptus, centroq; eodem
describantur alii quivis circuli ID, KE trajectoriam secantes in I & K
rectamq; CV in D & E. Age tum rectam CNIX secantem circulos KE, VY in N &
X, tum rectam CKY occurrentem circulo VXY in Y. Sint autem puncta I & K
sibi invicem vicinissima, & pergat corpus ab V per I, T & K ad k; sitq; A
altitudo illa de qua corpus aliud cadere debet ut in loco D velocitatem
acquirat æqualem velocitati corporis prioris in I; & stantibus quæ in
Propositione XXXIX, quoniam lineola IK, dato tempore quam minimo descripta,
est ut velocitas atq; adeo ut latus quadratum areæ ABFD, & triangulum ICK
tempori proportionale datur, adeoq; KN est reciproce ut altitudo IC, id
est, si detur quantitas aliqua Q, & altitudo IC nominetur A, ut Q ÷ A; quam
nominemus Z. Ponamus eam esse magnitudinem ipsius Q ut sit [sqrt]ABFD in
aliquo casu ad Z ut est IK ad KN, & erit semper [sqrt]ABFD ad Z ut IK ad
KN, & ABFD ad ZZ ut IK quad. ad KN quad. & divisim ABFD - ZZ ad ZZ ut IN
quad. ad KN quad. adeoq; [sqrt]{ABFD - ZZ} ad Z ut IN ad KN, & propterea A
× KN æquale Q × IN ÷ [sqrt]{ABFD - ZZ}. Unde cum YX × XC sit ad A × KN in
duplicata ratione YC ad KC, erit rectang. YX × XC æquale Q × IN × CX quad.
÷ AA [sqrt]{ABFD - ZZ}. Igitur si in perpendiculo DF capiantur semper Db,
Dc ipsis Q ÷ 2[sqrt]{ABFD - ZZ} & Q × CX quad. ÷ 2 AA [sqrt]{ABFD - ZZ}
æquales respective, & describantur curvæ lineæ ab, cd quas puncta b, c
perpetuo tangunt; deq; puncto V ad lineam AC erigatur perpendiculum Vad
abscindens areas curvilineas VDba, VDdc, & erigantur etiam ordinatæ Ez, Ex:
quoniam rectangulum Db × IN seu DbzE æquale est dimidio rectanguli A × KN,
seu triangulo ICK; & rectangulum Dc × IN seu Dc × E æquale est dimidio
rectanguli YX in CX, seu triangulo XCY; hoc est, quoniam arearum VDba, VIC
æquales semper sunt nascentes particulæ DbzE, ICK, & arearum VDcd, VCX
æquales semper sunt nascentes particulæ DExc, XCY, erit area genita VDba
æqualis areæ genitæ, VIC, adeoq; tempori proportionalis, & area genita VDdc
æqualis Sectori genito VCX. Dato igitur tempore quovis ex quo corpus
discessit de loco V, dabitur area ipsi proportionalis VDba, & inde dabitur
corporis altitudo CD vel CI; & area VDcd, eiq; æqualis Sector VCX una cum
ejus angulo VCI. Datis autem angulo VCI & altitudine CI datur locus I, in
quo corpus completo illo tempore reperietur.   Q. E. I.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc maximæ minimæq; corporum altitudines, id est Apsides
Trajectoriarum expedite inveniri possunt. Incidunt enim Apsides in puncta
illa in quibus recta IC per centrum ducta incidit perpendiculariter in
Trajectoriam VIK: id quod fit ubi rectæ IK & NK æquantur, adeoq; ubi area
ABFD æqualis est ZZ.

_Corol. 2._ Sed & angulus KIN, in quo Trajectoria alibi secat lineam illam
IC, ex data corporis altitudine IC expedite invenitur, nimirum capiendo
sinum ejus ad radium ut KN ad IK, id est ut Z ad latus quadratum areæ ABFD.

[Illustration]

_Corol. 3._ Si centro C & vertice principali V describatur sectio quælibet
Conica VRS, & a quovis ejus puncto R agatur Tangens RT occurrens axi
infinite producto CV in puncto T; dein juncta CR ducatur recta CP, quæ
æqualis sit abscissæ CT, angulumq; VCP Sectori VCR proportionalem
constituat; tendat autem ad centrum C vis centripeta cubo distantiæ locorum
a centro reciproce proportionalis, & exeat corpus de loco V justa cum
velocitate secundum lineam rectæ CV perpendicularem: progredietur corpus
illud in Trajectoria quam punctum P perpetuo tangit; adeoq; si conica
sectio CVRS Hyperbola sit, descendet idem ad centrum: Sin ea Ellipsis sit,
ascendet illud perpetuo & abibit in infinitum. Et contra, si corpus
quacunq; cum velocitate exeat de loco V, & perinde ut incæperit vel oblique
descendere ad centrum, vel ab eo oblique ascendere, figura CVRS vel
Hyperbola sit vel Ellipsis, inveniri potest Trajectoria augendo vel
minuendo angulum VCP in data aliqua ratione. Sed et vi centripeta in
centrifugam versa, ascendet corpus oblique in Trajectoria VPQ quæ invenitur
capiendo angulum VCP Sectori Elliptico CVRC proportionalem, & longitudinem
CP longitudini CT æqualem: ut supra. Consequuntur hæc omnia ex Propositione
præcedente, per Curvæ cujusdam quadraturam, cujus inventionem ut satis
facilem brevitatis gracia missam facio.

Prop. XLII. Prob. XXIX.

    _Data lege vis centripetæ, requiritur motus corporis de loco dato data
    cum velocitate secundum datam rectam egressi._

Stantibus quæ in tribus Propositionibus præcedentibus: exeat corpus de loco
I secundum lineolam IT, ea cum velocitate quam corpus aliud, vi aliqua
uniformi centripeta, de loco P cadendo acquirere posset in D: sitq; hæc vis
uniformis ad vim qua corpus primum urgetur in I, ut DR ad DF. Pergat autem
corpus versus k; centroq; C & intervallo Ck describatur circulus ke
occurrens rectæ PD in e, & erigantur curvarum ALMm, BFGg, abzv, dcxw
ordinatim applicatæ em, eg, ev, ew. Ex dato rectangulo PDRQ, dataq; lege
vis centripetæ qua corpus primum agitatur, dantur curvæ lineæ BFGg, ALMm,
per constructionem Problematis XXVIII. & ejus _Corol. 1._ Deinde ex dato
angulo CIT datur proportio nascentium IK, KN & inde, per constructionem
Prob. XXVIII, datur quantitas Q, una cum curvis lineis abzv, dcxw: adeoq;
completo tempore quovis Dbve, datur tum corporis altitudo Ce vel Ck, tum
area Dcwe, eiq; æqualis Sector XCy, angulusq; XCy & locus k in quo corpus
tunc versabitur.   Q. E. I.

Supponimus autem in his Propositionibus vim centripetam in recessu quidem a
centro variari secundum legem quamcunq; quam quis imaginari potest, in
æqualibus autem a centro distantiis esse undiq; eandem. Atq; hactenus
corporum in Orbibus immobilibus consideravimus. Superest ut de motu eorum
in Orbibus qui circa centrum virium revolvuntur adjiciamus pauca.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. IX.

_De Motu Corporum in Orbibus mobilibus, deq; motu Apsidum._

Prop. XLIII. Prob. XXX.

    _Efficiendum est ut corpus in Trajectoria quacunq; circa centrum virium
    revolvente perinde moveri possit, atq; corpus aliud in eadem
    Trajectoria quiescente._

In Orbe VPK positione dato revolvatur corpus P pergendo a V versus K. A
centro C agatur semper Cp, quæ sit ipsi CP æqualis, angulumq; VCp angulo
VCP proportionalem constituat; & area quam linea Cp describit erit ad aream
VCP quam linea CP describit, ut velocitas lineæ describentis Cp ad
velocitatem lineæ describentis CP; hoc est, ut angulus VCp ad angulum VCP,
adeoq; in data ratione, & propterea tempori proportionalis. Cum area
tempori proportionalis sit quam linea Cp in plano immobili describit,
manifestum est quod corpus, cogente justæ quantitatis vi centripeta,
revolvi possit una cum puncto p in curva illa linea quam punctum idem p
ratione jam exposita describit in plano immobili. Fiat angulus VCv angulo
PCp, & linea Cv lineæ CV, atq; figura vCp figuræ VCP æqualis, & corpus in p
[Illustration] semper existens movebitur in perimetro figuræ revolventis
vCp, eodemq; tempore describet arcum ejus vp quo corpus aliud P arcum ipsi
similem & æqualem VP in figura quiescente VPK describere potest. Quæratur
igitur, per Corollarium Propositionis VI, vis centripeta qua corpus revolvi
possit in curva illa linea quam punctum p describit in plano immobili, &
solvetur Problema.   Q. E. F.

Prop. XLIV. Theor. XIV.

    _Differentia virium, quibus corpus in Orbe quiescente, & corpus aliud
    in eodem Orbe revolvente æqualiter moveri possunt, est in triplicata
    ratione communis altitudinis inverse._

Partibus orbis quiescentis VP, PK sunto similes & æquales orbis revolventis
partes vp, pk. A puncto k in rectam, pC demitte perpendiculum kr, idemq;
produc ad m, ut sit mr ad kr ut angulus VCp ad angulum VCP. Quoniam
corporum altitudines PC & pC, KC & kC semper æquantur, manifestum est quod
si corporum in locis P & p existentium distinguantur motus singuli (per
Legum Corol. 2.) in binos, (quorum hi versus centrum, sive secundum lineas
PC, pC; alteri prioribus transversi secundum lineas ipsis PC, pC
perpendiculares determinantur) motus versus centrum erunt æquales, & motus
transversus corporis p erit ad motum transversum corporis P, ut motus
angularis lineæ pC ad motum angularem lineæ PC, id est ut angulus VCp ad
angulum VCP. Igitur eodem tempore quo corpus P motu suo utroq; pervenit ad
punctum K, corpus p æquali in centrum motu æqualiter movebitur a P versus
C, adeoq; completo illo tempore reperietur alicubi in linea mkr, quæ per
punctum k in lineam pC perpendicularis est; & motu transverso acquiret
distantiam a linea pC, quæ sit ad distantiam quam corpus alterum acquirit a
linea PC, ut est hujus motus transversus ad motum transversum alterius.
Quare cum kr æqualis sit distantiæ quam corpus alterum acquirit a linea pC,
sitq; mr ad kr ut angulus VCp ad angulum VCP, hoc est, ut motus transversus
corporis p ad motum transversum corporis P, manifestum est quod corpus p
completo illo tempore reperietur in loco m. Hæc ita se habebunt ubi corpora
P & p æqualiter secundum lineas pC & PC moventur, adeoq; æqualibus viribus
secundum lineas illas urgentur. Capiatur autem angulus pCn ad angulum pCk
ut est angulus VCp ad angulum VCP, sitq; nC æqualis kC, & corpus p completo
illo tempore revera reperietur in n; adeoq; vi majore urgetur, si modo
angulus mCp angulo kCp major est, id est si orbis Vpk movetur in
consequentia, & minore, si orbis regreditur; estq; virium differentia ut
locorum intervallum mn, per quod corpus illud p ipsius actione, dato illo
temporis spatio transferri debet. Centro C intervallo Cn vel Ck describi
intelligetur circulus secans lineas mr, mn productas in s & t, & erit
rectangulum mn × mt æquale rectangulo mk × ms, adeoq; mn æquale mk × ms ÷
mt. Cum autem triangula pCk, pCn dentur magnitudine, sunt kr & mr, earumq;
differentia mk & summa ms reciproce ut altitudo pC, adeoq; rectangulum mk ×
ms est reciproce ut quadratum altitudinis pC. Est & mt directe ut ½mt, id
est ut altitudo pC. Hæ sunt primæ rationes linearum nascentium; & hinc fit
mk × ms ÷ mt, id est lineola nascens mn, eiq; proportionalis virium
differentia reciproce ut cubus altitudinis pC.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc differentia virium in locis P & p vel K & k est ad vim qua
corpus motu circulari revolvi posset ab r ad k, eodem tempore quo corpus P
in orbe immobili describit arcum PK, ut mk × ms ad rk quadratum; hoc est si
capiantur datæ quantitates F, G in ea ratione ad invicem quam habet angulus
VCP ad angulum VCp, ut Gq. - Fq. ad Fq. Et propterea, si centro C
intervallo quovis CP vel Cp describatur Sector circularis æqualis areæ toti
VPC, quam corpus P tempore quovis in orbe immobili revolvens radio ad
centrum ducto descripsit, differentia virium, quibus corpus P in orbe
immobili & corpus p in orbe mobili revolvuntur, erit ad vim centripetam qua
corpus aliquod radio ad centrum ducto Sectorem illum, eodem tempore quo
descripta sit area VPC, uniformiter describere potuisset, ut Gq. - Fq. ad
Fq. Namq; sector ille & area pCk sunt ad invicem ut tempora quibus
describuntur.

_Corol. 2._ Si orbis VPK Ellipsis sit umbilicum habens C & Apsidem summam
V; eiq; similis & æqualis ponatur Ellipsis vpk, ita ut sit semper pc
æqualis PC, & angulus VCp sit ad angulum VCP in data ratione G ad F; pro
altitudine autem PC vel pc scribatur A, & pro Ellipseos latere recto
ponatur 2R: erit vis qua corpus in Ellipsi mobili revolvi potest, ut Fq. ÷
Aq. + {RGq. - RFq.} ÷ A cub. & contra. Exponatur enim vis qua corpus
revolvatur in immota Ellipsi per quantitatem Fq. ÷ Aq., & vis in V erit Fq.
÷ CV quad. Vis autem qua corpus in circulo ad distantiam CV ea cum
velocitate revolvi posset quam corpus in Ellipsi revolvens habet in V, est
ad vim qua corpus in Ellipsi revolvens urgetur in Apside V, ut dimidium
lateris recti Ellipseos ad circuli semidiametrum CV, adeoq; valet RFq. ÷ CV
cub.: & vis quæ sit ad hanc ut Gq. - Fq. ad Fq., valet {RGq. - RFq.} ÷ CV
cub.: estq; hæc vis (per hujus Corol. 1.) differentia virium quibus corpus
P in Ellipsi immota VPK, & corpus p in Ellipsi mobili vpk revolvuntur. Unde
cum (per hanc Prop.) differentia illa in alia quavis altitudine A sit ad
seipsam in altitudine CV ut 1 ÷ A cub. ad 1 ÷ CV cub., eadem differentia in
omni altitudine A valebit {RGq. - RFq.} ÷ A cub. Igitur ad vim Fq. ÷ Aq.
qua corpus revolvi potest in Ellipsi immobili VPK, addatur excessus {RGq. -
RFq.} ÷ A cub. & componetur vis tota Fq. ÷ Aq. + {RGq. - RFq.} ÷ A cub. qua
corpus in Ellipsi mobili vpk iisdem temporibus revolvi possit.

_Corol. 3._ Ad eundem modum colligetur quod, si orbis immobilis VPK
Ellipsis sit centrum habens in virium centro C; eiq; similis, æqualis &
concentrica ponatur Ellipsis mobilis vpk, sitq; 2R Ellipseos hujus latus
rectum, & 2T latus transversum atq; angulus VCp semper sit ad angulum VCP
ut G ad F; vires quibus corpora in Ellipsi immobili & mobili temporibus
æqualibus revolvi possunt, erunt ut Fq.A ÷ T cub. & Fq.A ÷ T cub. + {RGq. -
RFq.} ÷ A cub. respective.

[Illustration]

_Corol. 4._ Et universaliter, si corporis altitudo maxima CV nominetur T, &
radius curvaturæ quam Orbis VPK habet in V, id est radius circuli æqualiter
curvi, nominetur R, & vis centripeta qua corpus in Trajectoria quacunq;
immobili VPK revolvi potest, in loco V dicatur {Fq. ÷ Tq.} V, atq; aliis in
locis P indefinite dicatur X, altitudine CP nominata A, & capiatur G ad F
in data ratione anguli VCp ad angulum VCP: erit vis centripeta qua corpus
idem eosdem motus in eadem Trajectoria vpk circulariter mota temporibus
iisdem peragere potest, ut summa virium X + {VRGq. - VRFq.} ÷ A cub.

_Corol. 5._ Dato igitur motu corporis in Orbe quocunq; immobili, augeri vel
minui potest ejus motus angularis circa centrum virium in ratione data, &
inde inveniri novi orbes immobiles in quibus corpora novis viribus
centripetis gyrentur.

_Corol. 6._ Igitur si ad rectam CV positione datam erigatur perpendiculum
VP longitudinis indeterminatæ, jungaturq; PC, & ipsi æqualis agatur Cp,
constituens angulum VCp, qui sit ad angulum VCP in data ratione; vis qua
corpus gyrari potest in Curva illa Vpk quam punctum p perpetuo tangit, erit
reciproce ut cubus altitudinis Cp. Nam corpus P, per vim inertiæ, nulla
alia vi urgente, uniformiter progredi potest in recta VP. Addatur vis in
centrum C, cubo altitudinis CP vel Cp reciproce proportionalis, & (per jam
demonstrata) detorquebitur motus ille rectilineus in lineam curvam Vpk. Est
autem hæc Curva Vpk eadem cum Curva illa VPQ in Corol. 3. Prop. XLI
inventa, in qua ibi diximus corpora hujusmodi viribus attracta oblique
ascendere.

Prop. XLV. Prob. XXXI.

    _Orbium qui sunt Circulis maxime finitimi requiruntur motus Apsidum._

Problema solvitur Arithmetice faciendo ut orbis, quem corpus in Ellipsi
mobili, ut in Propositionis superioris Corol. 2. vel 3. revolvens,
describit in plano immobili, accedat ad formam orbis cujus Apsides
requiruntur, & quærendo Apsides orbis quem corpus illud in plano immobili
describit. Orbes autem eandem acquirent formam, si vires centripetæ quibus
describuntur, inter se collatæ, in æqualibus altitudinibus reddantur
proportionales. Sit punctum V Apsis summa, & scribantur T pro altitudine
maxima CV, A pro altitudine quavis alia CP vel Cp, & X pro altitudinum
differentia CV - CP; & vis qua corpus in Ellipsi circa umbilicum ejus C (ut
in Corollario 2.) revolvente movetur, quæq; in Corollario 2. erat ut Fq. ÷
Aq. + {RGq. - RFq.} ÷ A cub. id est ut {Fq. A + RGq. - RFq.} ÷ A cub.,
substituendo T - X pro A, erit ut {RGq. - RFq. + TFq. - Fq.X} ÷ A cub.
Reducenda similiter est vis alia quævis centripeta ad fractionem cujus
denominator sit A cub. & numeratores, facta homologorum terminorum
collatione, statuendi sunt analogi. Res Exemplis parebit.

_Exempl. 1._ Ponamus vim centripetam uniformem esse, adeoq; ut A cub. ÷ A
cub., sive (scribendo T - X pro A in Numeratore) ut {T cub. - 3Tq.X + 3TXq.
- X cub.} ÷ A cub.; & collatis Numeratorum terminis correspondentibus,
nimirum datis cum datis & non datis cum non datis, fiet RGq. - RFq. + TFq.
ad T cub. ut -Fq.X ad -3Tq.X + 3TXq. - X cub. sive ut -Fq. ad -3Tq. + 3TX -
Xq. Jam cum Orbis ponatur circulo quam maxime finitimus, coeat orbis cum
circulo; & ob factas R, T æquales, atq; X in infinitum diminutam, rationes
ultimæ erunt RGq. ad T cub. ut -Fq. ad -3Tq. seu Gq. ad Tq. ut Fq. ad 3Tq.
& vicissim G quadrat. ad F quadrat. ut T quad. ad 3T quad. id est, ut 1 ad
3; adeoq; G ad F, hoc est angulus VCp ad angulum VCP ut 1 ad [sqrt]3. Ergo
cum corpus in Ellipsi immobili, ab Apside summa ad Apsidem imam descendendo
conficiat angulum VCP (ut ita dicam) graduum 180; corpus aliud in Ellipsi
mobili, atq; adeo in orbe immobili de quo agimus, ab Abside summa ad
Apsidem imam descendendo conficiet angulum VCp graduum 180 ÷ [sqrt]3: id
adeo ob similitudinem orbis hujus, quem corpus agente uniformi vi
centripeta describit, & orbis illius quem corpus in Ellipsi revolvente
gyros peragens describit in plano quiescente. Per superiorem terminorum
collationem similes redduntur hi orbes, non universaliter, sed tunc cum ad
formam circularem quam maxime appropinquant. Corpus igitur uniformi cum vi
centripeta in orbe propemodum circulari revolvens, inter Apsidem summam &
Apsidem imam conficiet semper angulum 180 ÷ [sqrt]3 graduum, seu 103 gr. 55
m. ad centrum; perveniens ab Apside summa ad Apsidem imam, ubi semel
confecit hunc angulum, & inde ad Apsidem summam rediens, ubi iterum
confecit eundem angulum, & sic deinceps in infinitum.

_Exempl. 2._ Ponamus vim centripetam esse ut altitudinis A dignitas
quælibet A^{n - 3} seu A^n ÷ A^3: ubi n - 3 & n significant dignitatum
indices quoscunq; integros vel fractos, rationales vel irrationales,
affirmativos vel negativos. Numerator ille A^n seu {T - X}^n in seriem
indeterminatam per Methodum nostram Serierum convergentium reducta, evadit
T^n - nXT^{n - 1} + {nn - n}÷2 Xq.T^{n - 2} &c. Et collatis hujus terminis
cum terminis Numeratoris alterius RGq. - RFq. + TFq. - Fq.X, fit RGq. -
RFq. + TFq. ad T^n ut -Fq. ad -nT^{n - 1} + {nn - n}÷2 XT^{n - 2} &c. Et
sumendo rationes ultimas ubi orbes ad formam circularem accedunt, fit RGq.
ad T^n ut -Fq. ad -nT^{n - 1}, seu Gq. ad T^{n - 1} ut Fq. ad nT^{n - 1}, &
vicissim Gq. ad Fq. ut T^{n - 1} ad nT^{n - 1} id est ut 1 ad n; adeoq; G
ad F, id est angulus VCp ad angulum VCP, ut 1 ad [sqrt]n. Quare cum angulus
VCP, in descensu corporis ab Apside summa ad Apsidem imam in Ellipsi
confectus, sit graduum 180, conficietur angulus VCp, in descensu corporis
ab Apside summa ad Apsidem imam in Orbe propemodum circulari, quem corpus
quodvis vi centripeta dignitati A^{n - 3} proportionali describit, æqualis
angulo graduum 180 ÷ [sqrt]n; & hoc angulo repetito corpus redibit ab
Apside ima ad Apsidem summam, & sic deinceps in infinitum. Ut si vis
centripeta sit ut distantia corporis a centro, id est ut A seu A^4 ÷ A^3,
erit n æqualis 4 & [sqrt]4 æqualis 2; adeoq; angulus inter Apsidem summam &
Apsidem imam æqualis 180 ÷ 2 gr. seu 90 gr. Completa igitur quarta parte
revolutionis unius corpus perveniet ad Apsidem imam, & completa alia quarta
parte ad Apsidem summam, & sic deinceps per vices in infinitum. Id quod
etiam ex Propositione X. manifestum est. Nam corpus urgente hac vi
centripeta revolvetur in Ellipsi immobili, cujus centrum est in centro
virium. Quod si vis centripeta sit reciproce ut distantia, id est directe
ut 1 ÷ A seu A^2 ÷ A^3, erit n = 2, adeoq; inter Apsidem summam & imam
angulus erit graduum 180 ÷ [sqrt]2 seu 127 gr. 17 min. & propterea corpus
tali vi revolvens, perpetua anguli hujus repetitione, vicibus alternis ab
Apside summa ad imam & ab ima ad summam perveniet in æternum. Porro si vis
centripeta sit reciproce ut Latus quadrato-quadratum undecimæ dignitatis
Altitudinis, id est reciproce ut A^{11/4}, adeoq; directe ut 1 ÷ A^{11/4}
seu ut A^¼ ÷ A^3 erit n æqualis ¼, & 180 ÷ [sqrt]n gr. æqualis 360 gr. &
propterea corpus de Apside summa discedens & subinde perpetuo descendens,
perveniet ad Apsidem imam ubi complevit revolutionem integram, dein
perpetuo ascensu complendo aliam revolutionem integram, redibit ad Apsidem
summam: & sic per vices in æternum.

_Exempl. 3._ Assumentes m & n pro quibusvis indicibus dignitatum
Altitudinis, & b, c pro numeris quibusvis datis, ponamus vim centripetam
esse ut {bA^m + cA^n} ÷ A cub. id est ut {b in [=T - X]^m + c in [=T -
X]^n} ÷ A cub. seu (per eandem Methodum nostram Serierum convergentium) ut

                      mm-m                                  nn-n
  bT^m - mbXT^{m-1} + ----bX^2T^{m-2} + cT^n - ncXT^{n-1} + ----cX^2T^{n-2}
                        2                                     2         &c.
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       A cub.

& collatis numeratorum terminis, fiet RGq. - RFq. + TFq. ad bT^m + cT^n, ut
-Fq. ad -mbT^{m - 1} - ncT^{n - 1} + {mm - m}÷2 XT^{m - 2} + {nn - n}÷2
XT^{n - 2} &c. Et sumendo rationes ultimas quæ prodeunt ubi orbes ad formam
circularem accedunt, fit Gq. ad bT^{m - 1} + cT^{n - 1}, ut Fq. ad mbT^{m -
1} + ncT^{n - 1}, & vicissim Gq. ad Fq. ut bT^{m - 1} + cT^{n - 1} ad
mbT^{m - 1} + ncT^{n - 1}. Quæ proportio, exponendo altitudinem maximam CV
seu T Arithmetice per unitatem, fit Gq. ad Fq. ut b + c ad mb + nc, adeoq;
ut 1 ad {mb + nc} ÷ {b + c}. Unde est G ad F, id est angulus VCp ad angulum
VCP, ut 1 ad [sqrt]{{mb + nc} ÷ {b + c}}. Et propterea cum angulus VCP
inter Apsidem summam & Apsidem imam in Ellipsi immobili sit 180 gr. erit
angulus VCp inter easdem Apsides, in Orbe quem corpus vi centripeta
quantitati {bA^m + cA^n} ÷ A cub. proportionali describit, æqualis angulo
graduum 180 [sqrt]{{b + c} ÷ {mb + nc}}. Et eodem argumento si vis
centripeta sit ut {bA^m - cA^n} ÷ A cub., angulus inter Apsides invenietur
180 [sqrt]{{b - c} ÷ {mb - nc}} graduum. Nec secus resolvetur Problema in
casibus difficilioribus. Quantitas cui vis centripeta proportionalis est,
resolvi semper debet in series convergentes denominatorem habentes A cub.
Dein pars data Numeratoris hujus RGq. - RFq. + TFq. - Fq.X ad partem non
datam in eadem ratione ponendæ sunt: Et quantitates superfluas delendo,
scribendoq; unitatem pro T, obtinebitur proportio G ad F.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si vis centripeta sit ut aliqua altitudinis dignitas,
inveniri potest dignitas illa ex motu Apsidum; & contra. Nimirum si motus
totus angularis, quo corpus redit ad Apsidem eandem, sit ad motum angularem
revolutionis unius, seu graduum 360, ut numerus aliquis m ad numerum alium
n, & altitudo nominetur A: erit vis ut altitudinis dignitas illa A^{nn÷mm -
3}, cujus Index est nn÷mm - 3. Id quod per Exempla secunda manifestum est.
Unde liquet vim illam in majore quam triplicata altitudinis ratione
decrescere non posse: Corpus tali vi revolvens deq; Apside discedens, si
cæperit descendere, nunquam perveniet ad Apsidem imam seu altitudinem
minimam, sed descendet usq; ad centrum, describens curvam illam lineam de
qua egimus in Corol. 3. Prop. XLI. Sin cæperit illud de Apside discedens
vel minimum ascendere, ascendet in infinitum, neq; unquam perveniet ad
Apsidem summam. Describet enim curvam illam lineam de qua actum est in
eodem Corol. & in Corol. 6. Prop. XLIV. Sic & ubi vis in recessu a centro
decrescit in majori quam triplicata ratione altitudinis, corpus de Apside
discedens, perinde ut cæperit descendere vel ascendere, vel descendet ad
centrum usq; vel ascendet in infinitum. At si vis in recessu a centro vel
decrescat in minori quam triplicata ratione altitudinis, vel crescat in
altitudinis ratione quacunq; Corpus nunquam descendet ad centrum usq; sed
ad Apsidem imam aliquando perveniet: & contra, si corpus de Apside ad
Apsidem alternis vicibus descendens & ascendens nunquam appellat ad
centrum, Vis in recessu a centro aut augebitur, aut in minore quam
triplicata altitudinis ratione decrescet: & quo citius corpus de Apside ad
Apsidem redierit, eo longius ratio virium recedet a ratione illa
triplicata. Ut si corpus revolutionibus 8 vel 4 vel 2 vel 1½ de Apside
summa ad Apsidem summam alterno descensu & ascensu redierit, hoc est, si
fuerit m ad n ut 8 vel 4 vel 2 vel 1½ ad 1, adeoq; {nn ÷ mm} - 3 ualeat
1/64 - 3 vel 1/16 - 3 vel 1/4 - 3 vel 4/9 - 3, erit vis ut A^{1/64 - 3}
vel A^{1/16 - 3} vel A^{1/4 - 3} vel A^{4/9 - 3}, id est reciproce ut A^{3
- 1/64} vel A^{3 - 1/16} vel A^{3 - 1/4} vel A^{3 - 4/9}. Si corpus
singulis revolutionibus redierit ad Apsidem eandem immotam, erit m ad n ut
1 ad 1, adeoq; A^{nn÷mm - 3} æqualis A^{-2} seu 1 ÷ A^2, & propterea
decrementum virium in ratione duplicata altitudinis, ut in præcedentibus
demonstratum est. Si corpus partibus revolutionis unius vel tribus quartis,
vel duabus tertiis, vel una tertia, vel una quarta, ad Apsidem eandem
redierit, erit m ad n ut 3/4 vel 2/3 vel 1/3 vel 1/4 ad 1, adeoq;
A^{nn÷mm - 3} æqualis A^{16/9 - 3} vel A^{9/4 - 3} vel A^{9 - 3} vel A^{16
- 3} & propterea Vis aut reciproce ut A^{11/9} vel A^{3/4}, aut directe ut
A^6 vel A^{13}. Deniq; si Corpus pergendo ab Apside summa ad Apsidem summam
confecerit revolutionem integram, & præterea gradus tres, adeoq; Apsis illa
singulis corporis revolutionibus confecerit in Consequentia gradus tres,
erit m ad n ut 363gr. ad 360gr. adeoq; A^{nn÷mm - 3} erit æquale
A^{-265707÷131769}, & propterea Vis centripeta reciproce ut
A^{265707÷131769} seu A^{2-4/243}. Decrescit igitur Vis centripeta in
ratione paulo majore quam duplicata, sed quæ vicibus 60¾ propius ad
duplicatam quam ad triplicatam accedit.

_Corol. 2._ Hinc etiam si corpus, vi centripeta quæ sit reciproce ut
quadratum altitudinis, revolvatur in Ellipsi umbilicum habente in centro
virium, & huic vi centripetæ addatur vel auferatur vis alia quævis
extranea; cognosci potest (per Exempla tertia) motus Apsidum qui ex vi illa
extranea orietur: & contra. Ut si vis qua corpus revolvitur in Ellipsi sit
ut 1 ÷ A^2, & vis extranea ablata ut cA, adeoq; vis reliqua ut {A - cA^4} ÷
A^3; erit (in Exemplis tertiis) A æqualis 1 & n æqualis 4, adeoq; angulus
revolutionis inter Apsides æqualis angulo graduum 180[sqrt]{{1 - c} ÷ {1 -
4c}}. Ponatur vim illam extraneam esse 357,45 vicibus minorem quam vis
altera qua corpus revolvitur in Ellipsi, id est c esse 100 ÷ 35745, &
180[sqrt]{{1 - c} ÷ {1 - 4c}} evadet 180[sqrt]{35645 ÷ 35345} seu 180,7602,
id est 180gr. 45m. 37s. Igitur corpus de Apside summa discedens, motu
angulari 180gr. 45m. 37s. perveniet ad Apsidem imam, & hoc motu duplicato
ad Apsidem summam redibit: adeoq; Apsis summa singulis revolutionibus
progrediendo conficiet 1gr. 31m. 14s.

Hactenus de motu corporum in orbibus quorum plana per centrum virium
transeunt. Superest ut motus etiam determinemus in planis excentricis. Nam
Scriptores qui motum gravium tractant, considerare solent ascensus &
descensus ponderum, tam obliquos in planis quibuscunq; datis, quam
perpendiculares: & pari jure motus corporum viribus quibuscunq; centra
petentium, & planis excentricis innitentium hic considerandus venit. Plana
autem supponimus esse politissima & absolute lubrica ne corpora retardent.
Quinimo in his demonstrationibus, vice planorum quibus corpora incumbunt
quasq; tangunt incumbendo, usurpamus plana his parallela, in quibus centra
corporum moventur & orbitas movendo describunt. Et eadem lege motus
corporum in superficiebus curvis peractos subinde determinamus.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. X.

_De Motu Corporum in Superficiebus datis, deq; Funipendulorum Motu
reciproco._

Prop. XLVI. Prob. XXXII.

    _Posita cujuscunq; generis vi centripeta, datoq; tum virium centro tum
    plano quocunq; in quo corpus revolvitur, & concessis Figurarum
    curvilinearum quadraturis: requiritur motus corporis de loco dato data
    cum velocitate secundum Rectam in Plano illo datam egressi._

[Illustration]

Sit S centrum virium, SC distantia minima centri hujus a plano dato, P
corpus de loco P secundum rectam PZ egrediens, Q corpus idem in Trajectoria
sua revolvens, & PQR Trajectoria illa in plano dato descripta, quam
invenire oportet. Jungantur CQ, QS, & si in QS capiatur SV proportionalis
vi centripetæ qua corpus trahitur versus centrum S, & agatur VT quæ sit
parallela CQ & occurrat SC in T: Vis SV resolvetur (per Legum Corol. 2.) in
vires ST, TV; quarum ST trahendo corpus secundum lineam plano
perpendicularem, nil mutat motum ejus in hoc plano. Vis autem altera TV,
agendo secundum positionem plani, trahit corpus directe versus punctum C in
plano datum, adeoq; facit illud in hoc plano perinde moveri ac si vis ST
tolleretur, & corpus vi sola TV revolveretur circa centrum C in spatio
libero. Data autem vi centripeta TV qua corpus Q in spatio libero circa
centrum datum C revolvitur, datur per Prop. XLII. tum Trajectoria PQR quam
corpus describit, tum locus Q in quo corpus ad datum quodvis tempus
versabitur, tum deniq; velocitas corporis in loco illo Q; & contra.
Q. E. I.

Prop. XLVII. Theor. XV.

    _Posito quod vis centripeta proportionalis sit distantiæ corporis a
    centro; corpora omnia in planis quibuscunq; revolventia describent
    Ellipses, & revolutiones temporibus æqualibus peragent; quæq; moventur
    in lineis rectis ultro citroq; discurrendo, singulas eundi & redeundi
    periodos iisdem temporibus absolvent._

Nam stantibus quæ in superiore Propositione; vis SV qua corpus Q in plano
quovis PQR revolvens trahitur versus centrum S est ut distantia SQ; atq;
adeo ob proportionales SV & SQ, TV & CQ, vis TV qua corpus trahitur versus
punctum C in Orbis plano datum, est ut distantia CQ. Vires igitur, quibus
corpora in plano PQR versantia trahuntur versus punctum C, sunt pro ratione
distantiarum æquales viribus quibus corpora unaquaq; trahuntur versus
centrum S; & propterea corpora movebuntur iisdem temporibus in iisdem
figuris in plano quovis PQR circa punctum C, atq; in spatiis liberis circa
centrum S, adeoq; (per Corol. 2. Prop. X. & Corol. 2. Prop. XXXVIII.)
temporibus semper æqualibus, vel describent Ellipses in plano illo circa
centrum C, vel periodos movendi ultro citroq; in lineis rectis per centrum
C in plano illo ductis, complebunt.   Q. E. D.

_Scholium._

His affines sunt ascensus ac descensus corporum in superficiebus curvis.
Concipe lineas curvas in plano describi, dein circa axes quosvis datos per
centrum virium transeuntes revolvi, & ea revolutione superficies curvas
describere; tum corpora ita moveri ut eorum centra in his superficiebus
perpetuo reperiantur. Si corpora illa oblique ascendendo & descendendo
currant ultro citroq; peragentur eorum motus in planis per axem
transeuntibus, atq; adeo in lineis curvis quarum revolutione curvæ illæ
superficies genitæ sunt. Istis igitur in casibus sufficit motum in his
lineis curvis considerare.

Prop. XLVIII. Theor. XVI.

    _Si rota globo extrinsecus ad angulos rectos insistat, & more rotarum
    revolvendo progrediatur in circulo maximo; longitudo itineris
    curvilinei, quod punctum quodvis in rotæ perimetro datum, ex quo globum
    tetigit, confecit, erit ad duplicatum sinum versum arcus dimidii qui
    globum ex eo tempore inter eundem tetigit, ut summa diametrorum globi &
    rotæ ad semidiametrum globi._

Prop. XLIX. Theor. XVII.

    _Si rota globo concavo ad rectos angulos intrinsecus insistat &
    revolvendo progrediatur in circulo maximo; longitudo itineris
    curvilinei quod punctum quodvis in Rotæ Perimetro datum, ex quo globum
    tetigit, confecit, erit ad duplicatum sinum versum arcus dimidii qui
    globum toto hoc tempore inter eundum tetigit, ut differentia
    diametrorum globi & rotæ ad semidiametrum globi._

[Illustration]

Sit ABL globus, C centrum ejus, BPV rota ei insistens, E centrum rotæ, B
punctum contactus, & P punctum datum in perimetro rotæ. Concipe hanc Rotam
pergere in circulo maximo ABL ab A per B versus L, & inter eundum ita
revolvi ut arcus AB, PB sibi invicem semper æquentur, atq; punctum illud P
in Perimetro rotæ datum interea describere viam curvilineam AP. Sit autem
AP via tota curvilinea descripta ex quo Rota globum tetigit in A, & erit
viæ hujus longitudo AP ad duplum sinum versum arcus ½PB, ut 2CE ad CB. Nam
recta CE (si opus est producta) occurrat Rotæ in V, junganturq; CP, BP, EP,
VP, & in CP productam demittatur Normalis VF. Tangant PH, VH circulum in P
& V concurrentes in H, secetq; PH ipsam VF in G, & ad VP demittantur
Normales GI, HK. Centro item C & intervallo quovis describatur circulus nom
secans rectam CP in n, Rotæ perimetrum Bp in o & viam curvilineam AP in m,
centroq; V & intervallo Vo describatur circulus secans VP productam in q.

Quoniam Rota eundo semper revolvitur circa punctum contactus B, manifestum
est quod recta BP perpendicularis est ad lineam illam curvam AP, quam Rotæ
punctum P describit, atq; adeo quod recta VP tanget hanc curvam in puncto
P. Circuli nom radius sensim auctus æquetur tandem distantiæ CP, & ob
similitudinem figuræ evanescentis Pnomq & figuræ PFGVI, ratio ultima
lineolarum evanescentium Pm, Pn, Po, Pq, id est ratio incrementorum
momentaneorum curvæ AP, rectæ CP & arcus circularis BP, ac decrementi rectæ
VP, eadem erit quæ linearum PV, PF, PG, PI respective. Cum autem VF ad CF &
VH ad CV perpendiculares sunt, anguliq; HVG, VCF propterea æquales; &
angulus VHP, (ob angulos quadrilateri HVEP ad V & P rectos,) complet
angulum VEP ad duos rectos, adeoq; angulo CEP æqualis est, similia erunt
triangula VHG, CEP; & inde fiet ut EP ad CE ita HG ad HV seu HP, & ita KI
ad KP, & divisim ut CB ad CE ita PI ad PK, & duplicatis consequentibus ut
CB ad 2CE ita PI ad PV. Est igitur decrementum lineæ VP, id est incrementum
lineæ BV - VP, ad incrementum lineæ curvæ AP in data ratione CB ad 2CE, &
propterea (per Corol. Lem. IV.) longitudines BV - VP & AP incrementis illis
genitæ sunt in eadem ratione. Sed existente BV radio, est VP cosinus anguli
VPB seu ½BEP, adeoq; BV - VP sinus versus ejusdem anguli, & propterea in
hac Rota cujus radius est ½BV, erit BV - VP duplus sinus versus arcus ½BP.
Ergo AP est ad duplum sinum versum arcus ½BP ut 2CE ad CB.   Q. E. D.

Lineam autem AP in Propositione priore Cycloidem extra Globum, alteram in
posteriore Cycloidem intra Globum distinctionis gratia nominabimus.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si describatur Cyclois integra ASL & bisecetur ea in S,
erit longitudo partis PS ad longitudinem VP (quæ duplus est sinus anguli
VBP, existente EB radio) ut 2CE ad CB atq; adeo in ratione data.

_Corol. 2._ Et longitudo semiperimetri Cycloidis AS æquabitur lineæ rectæ,
quæ est ad Rotæ diametrum BV ut 2CE ad CB.

_Corol. 3._ Ideoq; longitudo illa est ut rectangulum BEC, si modo Globi
detur semidiameter.

Prop. L. Prob. XXXIII.

[Illustration]

    _Facere ut Corpus pendulum oscilletur in Cycloide data._

Intra Globum QVS centro C descriptum detur Cyclois QRS bisecta in R &
punctis suis extremis Q & S superficiei Globi hinc inde occurrens. Agatur
CR bisecans arcum QS in O, & producatur ea ad A, ut sit CA ad CO ut CO ad
CR. Centro C intervallo CA describatur Globus exterior ABD, & intra hunc
globum Rota, cujus diameter sit AO, describantur duæ semicycloides AQ, AS,
quæ globum interiorem tangant in Q & S & globo exteriori occurrant in A. A
puncto illo A, filo APT longitudinem AR æquante, pendeat corpus T, & ita
intra semicycloides AQ, AS oscilletur, ut quoties pendulum digreditur a
perpendiculo AR, filum parte sui superiore AP applicetur ad semicycloidem
illam APS, versus quam peragitur motus, & circum eam ceu obstaculum
flectatur, parteq; reliqua PT cui semicyclois nondum objicitur, protendatur
in lineam rectam; & pondus T oscillabitur in Cycloide data QRS.   Q. E. F.

Occurrat enim filum PT tum Cycloidi QRS in T, tum circulo QOS in V,
agaturq; CV occurrens circulo ABD in B; & ad fili partem rectam PT, e
punctis extremis P ac T, erigantur perpendicula PB, TW, occurrentia rectæ
CV in B & W. Patet enim ex genesi Cycloidis, quod perpendicula illa PB, TW,
abscindent de CV longitudines VB, VW rotarum diametris OA, OR æquales, atq;
adeo quod punctum B incidet in circulum ABD. Est igitur TP ad VP (duplum
sinum anguli VBP existente ½BV radio) ut BW ad BV, seu AO + OR ad AO, id
est (cum sint CA ad CO, CO ad CR & divisim AO ad OR proportionales,) ut CA
+ CO seu 2CE ad CA. Proinde per Corol. 1. Prop. XLIX. longitudo PT æquatur
Cycloidis arcui PS, & filum totum APT æquatur Cycloidis arcui dimidio APS,
hoc est (per Corollar. 2. Prop. XLIX) longitudini AR. Et propterea vicissim
si filum manet semper æquale longitudini AR movebitur punctum T in Cycloide
QRS.   Q. E. D.

_Corol._ Filum AR æquatur Cycloidis arcui dimidio APS.

Prop. LI. Theor. XVIII.

    _Si vis centripeta tendens undiq; ad Globi centrum C sit in locis
    singulis ut distantia loci cujusq; a centro, & hac sola vi agente
    Corpus T oscilletur (modo jam descripto) in perimetro Cycloidis QRS:
    dico quod oscillationum utcunq; inæqualium æqualia erunt Tempora._

Nam in Cycloidis tangentem TW infinite productam cadat perpendiculum CX &
jungatur CT. Quoniam vis centripeta qua corpus T impellitur versus C est ut
distantia CT, (per Legum Corol. 2.) resolvitur in partes CX, TX, quarum CX
impellendo corpus directe a P distendit filum PT & per cujus resistentiam
tota cessat, nullum alium edens effectum; pars autem altera TX urgendo
corpus transversim seu versus X, directe accelerat motum ejus in Cycloide;
manifestum est quod corporis acceleratio huic vi acceleratrici
proportionalis sit singulis momentis ut longitudo TX, id est, ob datas CV,
WV iisq; proportionales TX, TW, ut longitudo TW, hoc est (per Corol. 1.
Prop. XLIX.) ut longitudo arcus Cycloidis TR. Pendulis igitur duabus APT,
Apt de perpendiculo AR inæqualiter deductis & simul dimissis,
accelerationes eorum semper erunt ut arcus describendi TR, tR. Sunt autem
partes sub initio descriptæ ut accelerationes, hoc est ut totæ sub initio
describendæ, & propterea partes quæ manent describendæ & accelerationes
subsequentes his partibus proportionales sunt etiam ut totæ; & sic
deinceps. Sunt igitur accelerationes atq; adeo velocitates genitæ & partes
his velocitatibus descriptæ partesq; describendæ, semper ut totæ; &
propterea partes describendæ datam servantes rationem ad invicem simul
evanescent, id est corpora duo oscillantia simul pervenient ad
perpendiculum AR. Cumq; vicissim ascensus perpendiculorum de loco infimo R,
per eosdem arcus Trochoidales motu retrogrado facti, retardentur in locis
singulis a viribus iisdem a quibus descensus accelerabantur, patet
velocitates ascensuum ac descensuum per eosdem arcus factorum æquales esse,
atq; adeo temporibus æqualibus fieri; & propterea, cum Cycloidis partes duæ
RS & RQ ad utrumq; perpendiculi latus jacentes sint similes & æquales,
pendula duo oscillationes suas tam totas quam dimidias iisdem temporibus
semper peragent.   Q. E. D.

Prop. LII. Prob. XXXIV.

    _Definire & velocitates Pendulorum in locis singulis, & Tempora quibus
    tum oscillationes totæ, tum singulæ oscillationum partes peraguntur._

[Illustration]

Centro quovis G, intervallo GH Cycloidis arcum RS æquante, describe
semicirculum HKMG semidiametro GK bisectum. Et si vis centripeta distantiis
locorum a centro proportionalis tendat ad centrum G, sitq; ea in perimetro
HIK æqualis vi centripetæ in perimetro globi QOS (_Vide Fig. Prop. L. &
LI._) ad ipsius centrum tendente; & eodem tempore quo pendulum T dimittitur
e loco supremo S, cadat corpus aliquod L ab H ad G: quoniam vires quibus
corpora urgentur sunt æquales sub initio & spatiis describendis TR, GL
semper proportionales, atq; adeo, si æquantur TR & LG, æquales in locis T &
L; patet corpora illa describere spatia ST, HL æqualia sub initio, adeoq;
subinde pergere æqualiter urgeri, & æqualia spatia describere. Quare, per
Prop. XXXVIII., tempus quo corpus describit arcum ST est ad tempus
oscillationis unius, ut arcus HI (tempus quo corpus H perveniet ad L) ad
semicirculum HKM (tempus quo corpus H perveniet ad M.) Et velocitas
corporis penduli in loco T est ad velocitatem ipsius in loco infimo R, (hoc
est velocitas corporis H in loco L ad velocitatem ejus in loco G, seu
incrementum momentaneum lineæ HL ad incrementum momentaneum lineæ HG,
arcubus HI, HK æquabili fluxu crescentibus) ut ordinatim applicata LI ad
radium GK, sive ut [sqrt]{SRq. - TRq.} ad SR. Unde cum in Oscillationibus
inæqualibus describantur æqualibus temporibus arcus totis Oscillationum
arcubus proportionales, habentur ex datis temporibus & velocitates & arcus
descripti in Oscillationibus universis. Quæ erant primo invenienda.

[Illustration]

Oscillentur jam funipendula duo corpora in Cycloidibus inæqualibus & earum
semiarcubus æquales capiantur rectæ GH, gh, centrisq; G, g & intervallis
GH, gh describantur semicirculi HZKM, hzkm. In eorum diametris HM, hm
capiantur lineolæ æquales HY, hy, & erigantur normaliter YZ, yz
circumferentiis occurrentes in Z & z. Quoniam corpora pendula sub initio
motus versantur in circumferentia globi QOS, adeoq; a viribus æqualibus
urgentur in centrum, incipiuntq; directe versus centrum moveri, spatia
simul consecta æqualia erunt sub initio. Urgeantur igitur corpora H, h a
viribus iisdem in H & h, sintq; HY, hy spatia æqualia ipso motus initio
descripta, & arcus HZ, hz denotabunt æqualia tempora. Horum arcuum
nascentium ratio prima duplicata est eadem quæ rectangulorum GHY, ghy, id
est, eadem quæ linearum GH, gh adeoq; arcus capti in dimidiata ratione
semidiametrorum denotant æqualia tempora. Est ergo tempus totum in circulo
HKM, Oscillationi in una Cycloide respondens, ad tempus totum in circulo
hkm Oscillationi in altera Cycloide respondens, ut semiperiferia HKM ad
medium proportionale inter hanc semiperiferiam & semiperiferiam circuli
alterius hkm, id est in dimidiata ratione diametri HM ad diametrum hm, hoc
est in dimidiata ratione perimetri Cycloidis primæ ad perimetrum Cycloidis
alterius, adeoq; tempus illud in Cycloide quavis est (per Corol. 3. Prop.
XLIX.) ut latus quadratum rectanguli BEC contenti sub semidiametro Rotæ,
qua Cyclois descripta fuit, & differentia inter semidiametrum illam &
semidiametrum globi.   Q. E. I.   Est & idem tempus (per Corol. Prop. L.)
in dimidiata ratione longitudinis fili AR.   Q. E. I.

Porro si in globis concentricis describantur similes Cycloides: quoniam
earum perimetri sunt ut semidiametri globorum & vires in analogis
perimetrorum locis sunt ut distantiæ locorum a communi globorum centro, hoc
est ut globorum semidiametri, atq; adeo ut Cycloidum perimetri &
perimetrorum partes similes, æqualia erunt tempora quibus perimetrorum
partes similes Oscillationibus similibus describuntur, & propterea
Oscillationes omnes erunt Isochronæ. Cum igitur Oscillationum tempora in
Globo dato sint in dimidiata ratione longitudinis AR, atq; adeo (ob datam
AC) in dimidiata ratione numeri AR ÷ AC, id est in ratione integra numeri
[sqrt]{AR ÷ AC}; & hic numerus [sqrt]{AR ÷ AC} servata ratione AR ad AC (ut
fit in Cycloidibus similibus) idem semper maneat, & propterea in globis
diversis, ubi Cycloides sunt similes, sit ut tempus: manifestum est quod
Oscillationum tempora in alio quovis globo dato, atq; adeo in globis
omnibus concentricis sunt ut numerus [sqrt]{AR ÷ AC}, id est, in ratione
composita ex dimidiata ratione longitudinis fili AR directe & dimidiata
ratione semidiametri globi AC inverse.   Q. E. I.

Deniq; si vires absolutæ diversorum globorum ponantur inæquales,
accelerationes temporibus æqualibus factæ, erunt ut vires. Unde si tempora
capiantur in dimidiata ratione virium inverse, velocitates erunt in eadem
dimidiata ratione directe, & propterea spatia erunt æqualia quæ his
temporibus describuntur. Ergo Oscillationes in globis & Cycloidibus
omnibus, quibuscunq; cum viribus absolutis factæ, sunt in ratione quæ
componitur ex dimidiata ratione longitudinis Penduli directe, & dimidiata
ratione distantiæ inter centrum Penduli & centrum globi inverse, &
dimidiata ratione vis absolutæ etiam inverse, id est, si vis illa dicatur
V, in ratione numeri [sqrt]{AR ÷ {AC × V}}.   Q. E. I.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc etiam Oscillantium, cadentium & revolventium corporum
tempora possunt inter se conferri. Nam si Rotæ, qua Cyclois intra globum
describitur, diameter constituatur æqualis semidiametro globi, Cyclois
evadet linea recta per centrum globi transiens, & Oscillatio jam erit
descensus & subsequens ascensus in hac recta. Unde datur tum tempus
descensus de loco quovis ad centrum, tum tempus huic æquale quo corpus
uniformiter circa centrum globi ad distantiam quamvis revolvendo arcum
quadrantalem describit. Est enim hoc tempus (per Casum secundum) ad tempus
semioscillationis in Trochoide quavis APS ut ½BC ad [sqrt]BEC.

_Corol. 2._ Hinc etiam consectantur quæ _D. C. Wrennus_ & _D. C. Hugenius_
de Cycloide vulgari adinvenerunt. Nam si globi diameter augeatur in
infinitum, mutabitur ejus superficies Sphærica in planum, visq; centripeta
aget uniformiter secundum lineas huic plano perpendiculares, & Cyclois
nostra abibit in Cycloidem vulgi. Isto autem in casu, longitudo arcus
Cycloidis, inter planum illud & punctum describens, æqualis evadet
quadruplicato sinui verso dimidii arcus Rotæ inter idem planum & punctum
describens; ut invenit _D. C. Wrennus_: Et pendulum inter duas ejusmodi
Cycloides in simili & æquali Cycloide temporibus æqualibus Oscillabitur, ut
demonstravit _Hugenius_. Sed & descensus gravium, tempore Oscillationis
unius, is erit quem _Hugenius_ indicavit.

Aptantur autem Propositiones a nobis demonstratæ ad veram constitutionem
Terræ, quatenus Rotæ eundo in ejus circulis maximis describunt motu
clavorum Cycloides extra globum; & Pendula inferius in fodinis & cavernis
Terra suspensa, in Cycloidibus intra globos Oscillari debent, ut
Oscillationes omnes evadant Isochronæ. Nam Gravitas (ut in Libro tertio
docebitur) decrescit in progressu a superficie Terræ, sursum quidem in
duplicata ratione distantiarum a centro ejus, deorsum vero in ratione
simplici.

Prop. LIII. Prob. XXXV.

    _Concessis figurarum curvilinearum Quadraturis, invenire vires quibus
    corpora in datis curvis lineis Oscillationes semper Isochronas
    peragent._

[Illustration]

Oscilletur corpus T in curva quavis linea STRQ, cujus axis sit OR transiens
per virium centrum C. Agatur TX quæ curvam illam in corporis loco quovis T
contingat, inq; hac Tangente TX capiatur TY æqualis arcui TR. Nam longitudo
arcus illius ex figurarum Quadraturis per Methodos vulgares innotescit. De
puncto Y educatur recta YZ Tangenti perpendicularis. Agatur CT
perpendiculari illi occurrens in Z, & erit vis centripeta proportionalis
rectæ TZ.   Q. E. I.

Nam si vis, qua corpus trahitur de T versus C, exponatur per rectam TZ
captam ipsi proportionalem, resolvetur hæc in vires TY, YZ; quarum YZ
trahendo corpus secundum longitudinem fili PT, motum ejus nil mutat, vis
autem altera TY motum ejus in curva STRQ directe accelerat vel directe
retardat. Proinde cum hæc sit ut via describenda TR, accelerationes
corporis vel retardationes in Oscillationum duarum (majoris & minoris)
partibus proportionalibus describendis, erunt semper ut partes illæ, &
propterea facient ut partes illæ simul describantur. Corpora autem quæ
partes totis semper proportionales simul describunt, simul describent
totas.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si corpus T filo rectilineo AT a centro A pendens,
describat arcum circularem STRQ, & interea urgeatur secundum lineas
parallelas deorsum a vi aliqua, quæ sit ad vim uniformem gravitatis, ut
arcus TR ad ejus sinum TN: æqualia erunt Oscillationum singularum tempora.
Etenim ob parallelas TZ, AR, similia erunt triangula ANT, TYZ; & propterea
TZ erit ad AT ut TY ad TN; hoc est, si gravitatis vis uniformis exponatur
per longitudinem datam AT, vis TZ, qua Oscillationes evadent Isochronæ,
erit ad vim gravitatis AT, ut arcus TR ipsi TY æqualis ad arcus illius
sinum TN.

_Corol. 2._ Igitur in Horologiis, si vires a Machina in Pendulum ad motum
conservandum impressæ ita cum vi gravitatis componi possint, ut vis tota
deorsum semper sit ut linea quæ oritur applicando rectangulum sub arcu TR &
radio AR, ad sinum TN, Oscillationes omnes erunt Isochronæ.

Prop. LIV. Prob. XXXVI.

    _Concessis figurarum curvilinearum quadraturis, invenire tempora quibus
    corpora vi qualibet centripeta in lineis quibuscunq; curvis in plano
    per centrum virium transeunte descriptis, descendent & ascendent._

[Illustration]

Descendat enim corpus de loco quovis S per lineam quamvis curvam STtR in
plano per virium centrum C transeunte datam. Jungatur CS & dividatur eadem
in partes innumeras æquales, sitq; Dd partium illarum aliqua. Centro C,
intervallis CD, Cd describantur circuli DT, dt, Lineæ curvæ STtR
occurrentes in T & t. Et ex data tum lege vis centripetæ, tum altitudine CS
de qua corpus cecidit; dabitur velocitas corporis in alia quavis altitudine
CT, per Prop. XXXIX. Tempus autem, quo corpus describit lineolam Tt, est ut
lineolæ hujus longitudo (id est ut secans anguli tTC) directe, & velocitas
inverse. Tempori huic proportionalis sit ordinatim applicata DN ad rectam
CS per punctum D perpendicularis, & ob datam Dd erit rectangulum Dd × DN,
hoc est area DNnd, eidem tempori proportionale. Ergo si SNn sit curva illa
linea quam punctum N perpetuo tangit, erit area SNDS proportionalis tempori
quo corpus descendendo descripsit lineam ST; proindeq; ex inventa illa area
dabitur tempus.   Q. E. I.

Prop. LV. Theor. XIX.

    _Si corpus movetur in superficie quacunq; curva, cujus axis per centrum
    virium transit, & a corpore in axem demittatur perpendicularis, eiq;
    parallela & æqualis ab axis puncto quovis ducatur: dico quod parallela
    illa aream tempori proportionalem describet._

[Illustration]

Sit BSKL superficies curva, T corpus in ea revolvens, STtR Trajectoria quam
corpus in eadem describit, S initium Trajectoriæ, OMNK axis superficiei
curvæ, TN recta a corpore in axem perpendicularis, OP huic parallela &
æqualis a puncto O quod in axe datur educta, AP vestigium Trajectoriæ a
puncto P in lineæ volubilis OP plano AOP descriptum, A vestigii initium
puncto S respondens, TC recta a corpore ad centrum ducta; TG pars ejus vi
centripetæ qua corpus urgetur in centrum C proportionalis; TM recta ad
superficiem curvam perpendicularis; TI pars ejus vi pressionis qua corpus
urget superficiem, vicissimq; urgetur versus M a superficie,
proportionalis; PHTF recta axi parallela per corpus transiens, & GF, IH
rectæ a punctis G & I in parallelam illam PHTF perpendiculariter demissæ.
Dico jam quod area AOP, radio OP ab initio motus descripta, sit tempori
proportionalis. Nam vis TG (per Legum Corol. 2.) resolvitur in vires TF,
FG; & vis TI in vires TH, HI: Vires autem TF, TH agendo secundum lineam PF
plano AOP perpendicularem mutant solummodo motum corporis quatenus huic
plano perpendicularem. Ideoq; motus ejus quatenus secundum positionem plani
factus, hoc est motus puncti P, quo Trajectoriæ vestigium AP in hoc plano
describitur, idem est ac si vires TF, TH tollerentur, & corpus solis
viribus FG, HI agitaretur, hoc est idem ac si corpus in plano AOP vi
centripeta ad centrum O tendente & summam virium FG & HI æquante,
describeret curvam AP. Sed vi tali describetur area AOP (per Prop. I.)
tempori proportionalis.   Q. E. D.

_Corol._ Eodem argumento si corpus a viribus agitatum ad centra duo vel
plura in eadem quavis recta CO data tendentibus, describeret in spatio
libero lineam quamcunq; curvam ST, foret area AOP tempori semper
proportionalis.

Prop. LVI. Prob. XXXVII.

    _Concessis figurarum curvilinearum Quadraturis, datisq; tum lege vis
    centripetæ ad centrum datum tendentis, tum superficie curva cujus axis
    per centrum illud transit; invenienda est Trajectoria quam corpus in
    eadem superficie describet, de loco dato, data cum velocitate versus
    plagam in superficie illa datam egressum._

Stantibus quæ in superiore Propositione constructa sunt, exeat corpus de
loco S in Trajectoriam inveniendam STtR & ex data ejus velocitate in
altitudine SC dabitur ejus velocitas in alia quavis altitudine TC. Ea cum
velocitate, dato tempore quam minimo, describat corpus Trajectoriæ suæ
particulam Tt, sitq; Pp vestigium ejus plano AOP descriptum. Jungatur Op, &
circelli centro T intervallo Tt in superficie curva descripti sit PpQ
vestigium Ellipticum in eodem plano OAPp descriptum. Et ob datum
magnitudine & positione circellum, dabitur Ellipsis illa PpQ. Cumq; area
POp sit tempori proportionalis, atq; adeo ex dato tempore detur, dabitur Op
positione, & inde dabitur communis ejus & Ellipseos intersectio p, una cum
angulo OPp, in quo Trajectoriæ vestigium APp secat lineam OP. Inde autem
invenietur Trajectoriæ vestigium illud APp, eadem methodo qua curva linea
VIKk in Propositione XLI. ex similibus datis inventa fuit. Tum ex singulis
vestigii punctis P erigendo ad planum AOP perpendicula PT superficiei curvæ
occurrentia in T, dabuntur singula Trajectoriæ puncta T.   Q. E. I.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. XI.

_De Motu Corporum Sphæricorum viribus centripetis se mutuo petentium._

Hactenus exposui motus corporum attractorum ad centrum immobile, quale
tamen vix extat in rerum natura. Attractiones enim fieri solent ad corpora;
& corporum trahentium & attractorum actiones semper mutuæ sunt & æquales,
per Legem tertiam: adeo ut neq; attrahens possit quiescere neq; attractum,
si duo sint corpora, sed ambo (per Legum Corollarium quartum) quasi
attractione mutua, circum gravitatis centrum commune revolvantur: & si
plura sint corpora (quæ vel ab unico attrahantur vel omnia se mutuo
attrahant) hæc ita inter se moveri debeant, ut gravitatis centrum commune
vel quiescat vel uniformiter moveatur in directum. Qua de causa jam pergo
motum exponere corporum se mutuo trahentium, considerando vires centripetas
tanquam Attractiones, quamvis fortasse, si physice loquamur, verius
dicantur Impulsus. In Mathematicis enim jam versamur, & propterea missis
disputationibus Physicis, familiari utimur sermone, quo possimus a
Lectoribus Mathematicis facilius intelligi.

Prop. LVII. Theor. XX.

    _Corpora duo se invicem trahentia describunt, & circum commune centrum
    gravitatis, & circum se mutuo, figuras similes._

Sunt enim distantiæ a communi gravitatis centro reciproce proportionales
corporibus, atq; adeo in data ratione ad invicem, & componendo, in data
ratione ad distantiam totam inter corpora. Feruntur autem hæ distantiæ
circum terminos suos communi motu angulari, propterea quod in directum
semper jacentes non mutant inclinationem ad se mutuo. Lineæ autem rectæ,
quæ sunt in data ratione ad invicem, & æquali motu angulari circum terminos
suos feruntur, figuras circum eosdem terminos (in planis quæ una cum his
terminis vel quiescunt vel motu quovis non angulari moventur) describunt
omnino similes. Proinde similes sunt figuræ quæ his distantiis circumactis
describuntur.   Q. E. D.

Prop. LVIII. Theor. XXI.

    _Si corpora duo viribus quibusvis se mutuo trahunt, & interea
    revolvuntur circa gravitatis centrum commune: dico quod figuris, quas
    corpora sic mota describunt circum se mutuo, potest figura similis &
    æqualis, circum corpus alterutrum immotum, viribus iisdem describi._

Revolvantur corpora S, P circa commune gravitatis centrum C, pergendo de S
ad T deq; P ad Q. A dato puncto s ipsis SP, TQ æquales & parallelæ ducantur
semper sp, sq; & curva pqv quam punctum p, revolvendo circum punctum
immotum s, describit, erit similis & æqualis curvis quas corpora S, P
describunt circum se mutuo: proindeq; (per Theor. XX.) similis curvis ST &
PQV, quas eadem corpora describunt circum commune gravitatis centrum C: id
adeo quia proportiones linearum SC, CP & SP vel sp ad invicem dantur.

[Illustration]

_Cas. 1._ Commune illud gravitatis centrum C, per Legum Corollarium
quartum, vel quiescit vel movetur uniformiter in directum. Ponamus primo
quod id quiescit, inq; s & p locentur corpora duo, immobile in s, mobile in
p, corporibus S & P similia & æqualia. Dein tangant rectæ PR & pr Curvas PQ
& pq in P & p, & producantur CQ & sq ad R & r. Et ob similitudinem
figurarum CPRQ, sprq, erit RQ ad rq ut CP ad sp, adeoq; in data ratione.
Proinde si vis qua Corpus P versus Corpus S, atq; adeo versus centrum
intermedium C attrahitur, esset ad vim qua corpus p versus centrum s
attrahitur in eadem illa ratione data, hæ vires æqualibus temporibus
attraherent semper corpora de tangentibus PR, pr ad arcus PQ, pq, per
intervalla ipsis proportionalia RQ, rq; adeoq; vis posterior efficeret ut
corpus p gyraretur in curva pqv, quæ similis esset curvæ PQV, in qua vis
prior efficit ut corpus P gyretur, & revolutiones iisdem temporibus
complerentur. At quoniam vires illæ non sunt ad invicem in ratione CP ad
sp, sed (ob similitudinem & æqualitatem corporum S & s, P & p, &
æqualitatem distantiarum SP, sp) sibi mutuo æquales, corpora æqualibus
temporibus æqualiter trahentur de Tangentibus; & propterea ut corpus
posterius p trahatur per intervallum majus rq, requiritur tempus majus,
idq; in dimidiata ratione intervallorum; propterea quod, per Lemma decimum,
spatia ipso motus initio descripta sunt in duplicata ratione temporum.
Ponatur igitur velocitas corporis p esse ad velocitatem corporis P in
dimidiata ratione distantiæ sp ad distantiam CP, eo ut temporibus quæ sint
in eadem dimidiata ratione describantur arcus PQ, pq, qui sunt in ratione
integra: Et corpora P, p viribus æqualibus semper attracta describent
circum centra quiescentia C & s figuras similes PQV, pqv, quarum posterior
pqv similis est & æqualis figuræ quam corpus P circum corpus mobile S
describit.   Q. E. D.

_Cas. 2._ Ponamus jam quod commune gravitatis centrum, una cum spatio in
quo corpora moventur inter se, progreditur uniformiter in directum; &, per
Legum Corollarium sextum, motus omnes in hoc spatio peragentur ut prius,
adeoq; corpora describent circum se mutuo figuras easdem ac prius, &
propterea figuræ pqv similes & æquales.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc corpora duo viribus distantiæ suæ proportionalibus se
mutuo trahentia, describunt (per Prop. X.) & circum commune gravitatis
centrum, & circum se mutuo, Ellipses concentricas: & vice versa, si tales
figuræ describuntur, sunt vires distantiæ proportionales.

_Corol. 2._ Et corpora duo viribus quadrato distantiæ suæ reciproce
proportionalibus describunt (per Prop. XI, XII, XIII.) & circum commune
gravitatis centrum, & circum se mutuo sectiones conicas umbilicos habentes
in centro circum quod figuræ describuntur. Et vice versa, si tales figuræ
describuntur, vires centripetæ sunt quadrato distantiæ reciproce
proportionales.

_Corol. 3._ Corpora duo quævis circum gravitatis centrum commune gyrantia,
radiis & ad centrum illud & ad se mutuo ductis, describunt areas temporibus
proportionales.

Prop. LIX. Theor. XXII.

    _Corporum duorum S & P circa commune gravitatis centrum C revolventium
    tempus periodicum esse ad tempus periodicum corporis alterutrius P,
    circa alterum immotum S gyrantis & figuris quæ corpora circum se mutuo
    describunt figuram similem & æqualem describentis, in dimidiata ratione
    corporis alterius S, ad summam corporum S + P._

Namq; ex demonstratione superioris Propositionis, tempora quibus arcus
quivis similes PQ & pq describuntur, sunt in dimidiata ratione distantiarum
CP & SP vel sp, hoc est, in dimidiata ratione corporis S ad summam corporum
S + P. Et componendo, summæ temporum quibus arcus omnes similes PQ & pq
describuntur, hoc est tempora tota quibus figuræ totæ similes describuntur,
sunt in eadem dimidiata ratione.   Q. E. D.

Prop. LX. Theor. XXIII.

    _Si corpora duo S & P, viribus quadrato distantiæ suæ reciproce
    proportionalibus se mutuo trahentia, revolvuntur circa gravitatis
    centrum commune: dico quod Ellipseos, quam corpus alterutrum P hoc motu
    circa alterum S describit, Axis transversus erit ad axem transversum
    Ellipseos, quam corpus idem P circa alterum quiescens S eodem tempore
    periodico describere posset, ut summa corporum duorum S + P ad primam
    duarum medie proportionalium inter hanc summam & corpus illud alterum
    S._

Nam si descriptæ Ellipses essent sibi invicem æquales, tempora periodica,
per Theorema superius, forent in dimidiata ratione corporis S ad summam
corporum S + P. Minuatur in hac ratione tempus periodicum in Ellipsi
posteriore, & tempora periodica evadent æqualia, Ellipseos autem axis
transversus per Theorema VII. minuetur in ratione cujus hæc est
sesquiplicata, id est in ratione, cujus ratio S ad S + P est triplicata;
adeoq; ad axem transversum Ellipseos alterius, ut prima duarum medie
proportionalium inter S + P & S ad S + P. Et inverse, axis transversus
Ellipseos circa corpus mobile descriptæ erit ad axem transversum descriptæ
circa immobile, ut S + P ad primam duarum medie proportionalium inter S + P
& S.   Q. E. D.

Prop. LXI. Theor. XXIV.

    _Si corpora duo viribus quibusvis se mutuo trahentia, neq; alias
    agitata vel impedita, quomodocunq; moveantur; motus eorum perinde se
    habebunt ac si non traherent se mutuo, sed utrumq; a corpore tertio in
    communi gravitatis centro constituto viribus iisdem traheretur: Et
    Virium trahentium eadem erit Lex respectu distantiæ corporum a centro
    illo communi atq; respectu distantiæ totius inter corpora._

Nam vires illæ, quibus corpora se mutuo trahunt, tendendo ad corpora,
tendunt ad commune gravitatis centrum intermedium, adeoq; eædem sunt ac si
a corpore intermedio manarent.   Q. E. D.

Et quoniam data est ratio distantiæ corporis utriusvis a centro illo
communi ad distantiam corporis ejusdem a corpore altero, dabitur ratio
cujusvis potestatis distantiæ unius ad eandem potestatem distantiæ
alterius; ut & ratio quantitatis cujusvis, quæ ex una distantia &
quantitatibus datis utcunq; derivatur, ad quantitatem aliam, quæ ex altera
distantia & quantitatibus totidem datis datamq; illam distantiarum rationem
ad priores habentibus similiter derivatur. Proinde si vis, qua corpus unum
ab altero trahitur, sit directe vel inverse ut distantia corporum ab
invicem; vel ut quælibet hujus distantiæ potestas; vel deniq; ut quantitas
quævis ex hac distantia & quantitatibus datis quomodocunq; derivata: erit
eadem vis, qua corpus idem ad commune gravitatis centrum trahitur, directe
itidem vel inverse ut corporis attracti distantia a centro illo communi,
vel ut eadem distantiæ hujus potestas, vel deniq; ut quantitas ex hac
distantia & analogis quantitatibus datis similiter derivata. Hoc est Vis
trahentis eadem erit Lex respectu distantiæ utriusq;.   Q. E. D.

Prop. LXII. Prob. XXXVIII.

    _Corporum duorum quæ viribus quadrato distantiæ suæ reciproce
    proportionalibus se mutuo trahunt, ac de locis datis demittuntur,
    determinare motus._

Corpora, per Theorema novissimum, perinde movebuntur, ac si a corpore
tertio in communi gravitatis centro constituto traherentur; & centrum illud
ipso motus initio quiescet (per Hypothesin) & propterea (per Legum Corol.
4.) semper quiescet. Determinandi sunt igitur motus Corporum (per Probl.
XXV.) perinde ac si a viribus ad centrum illud tendentibus urgerentur, &
habebuntur motus corporum se mutuo trahentium.   Q. E. I.

Prop. LXIII. Prob. XXXIX.

    _Corporum duorum quæ viribus quadrato distantiæ suæ reciproce
    proportionalibus se mutuo trahunt, deq; locis datis, secundum datas
    rectas, datis cum velocitatibus exeunt, determinare motus._

Ex datis corporum motibus sub initio, datur uniformis motus centri communis
gravitatis, ut & motus spatii quod una cum hoc centro movetur uniformiter
in directum, nec non corporum motus initiales respectu hujus spatii. Motus
autem subsequentes (per Legum Corollarium quintum & Theorema novissimum)
perinde fiunt in hoc spatio, ac si spatium ipsum una cum communi illo
gravitatis centro quiesceret, & corpora non traherent se mutuo, sed a
corpore tertio sito in centro illo traherentur. Corporis igitur alterutrius
in hoc spatio mobili de loco dato, secundum datam rectam, data cum
velocitate exeuntis, & vi centripeta ad centrum illud tendente correpti,
determinandus est motus per Problema nonum & vicesimum sextum: & habebitur
simul motus corporis alterius e regione. Cum hoc motu componendus est
uniformis ille Systematis spatii & corporum in eo gyrantium motus
progressivus supra inventus, & habebitur motus absolutus corporum in spatio
immobili.   Q. E. I.

Prop. LXIV. Prob. XL.

    _Viribus quibus Corpora se mutuo trahunt crescentibus in simplici
    ratione distantiarum a centris: requiruntur motus plurium Corporum
    inter se._

Ponantur imprimis corpora duo T & L commune habentia gravitatis centrum D.
Describent hæc per Corollarium primum Theorematis XXI. Ellipses centra
habentes in D, quarum magnitudo ex Problemate V. innotescit.

[Illustration]

Trahat jam corpus tertium S priora duo T & L viribus acceleratricibus ST,
SL, & ab ipsis vicissim trahatur. Vis ST per Legum Corol. 2. resolvitur in
vires SD, DT; & vis SL in vires SD, DL. Vires autem DT, DL, quæ sunt ut
ipsarum summa TL, atq; adeo ut vires acceleratrices quibus corpora T & L se
mutuo trahunt, additæ his viribus corporum T & L, prior priori & posterior
posteriori, componunt vires distantiis DT ac DL proportionales, ut prius,
sed viribus prioribus majores; adeoq; (per Corol. 1. Prop. X. & Corol. 1 &
7. Prop. IV.) efficiunt ut corpora illa describant Ellipses ut prius, sed
motu celeriore. Vires reliquæ acceleratrices SD & SD, actionibus motricibus
SD × T & SD × L, quæ sunt ut corpora, trahendo corpora illa æqualiter &
secundum lineas TI, LK, ipsi DS parallelas, nil mutant situs earum ad
invicem, sed faciunt ipsa æqualiter accedere ad lineam IK; quam ductam
concipe per medium corporis S, & lineæ DS perpendicularem. Impedietur autem
iste ad lineam IK accessus faciendo ut Systema corporum T & L ex una parte,
& corpus S ex altera, justis cum velocitatibus, gyrentur circa commune
gravitatis centrum C. Tali motu corpus S (eo quod summa virium motricium SD
× T & SD × L, distantiæ CS proportionalium, trahitur versus centrum C)
describit Ellipsin circa idem C; & punctum D ob proportionales CS, CD
describet Ellipsin consimilem, e regione. Corpora autem T & L viribus
motricibus SD × T & SD × L, (prius priore, posterius posteriore) æqualiter
& secundum lineas parallelas TI & LK (ut dictum est) attracta, pergent (per
Legum Corollarium quintum & sextum) circa centrum mobile D Ellipses suas
describere, ut prius.   Q. E. I.

Addatur jam corpus quartum V, & simili argumento concludetur hoc & punctum
C Ellipses circa omnium commune centrum gravitatis B describere; manentibus
motibus priorum corporum T, L & S circa centra D & C, sed paulo
acceleratis. Et eadem methodo corpora plura adjungere licebit.   Q. E. I.

Hæc ita se habent ubi corpora T & L trahunt se mutuo viribus
acceleratricibus majoribus vel minoribus quam trahunt corpora reliqua pro
ratione distantiarum. Sunto mutuæ omnium attractiones acceleratrices ad
invicem ut distantiæ ductæ in corpora trahentia, & ex præcedentibus facile
deducetur quod corpora omnia æqualibus temporibus periodicis Ellipses
varias, circa omnium commune gravitatis centrum B, in plano immobili
describunt.   Q. E. I.

Prop. LXV. Theor. XXV.

    _Corpora plura quorum vires decrescunt in duplicata ratione
    distantiarum ab eorundem centris, moveri posse inter se in Ellipsibus,
    & radiis ad umbilicos ductis Areas describere temporibus proportionales
    quam proxime._

In Propositione superiore demonstratus est casus ubi motus plures
peraguntur in Ellipsibus accurate. Quo magis recedit lex virium a lege ibi
posita, eo magis corpora perturbabunt mutuos motus, neq; fieri potest ut
corpora secundum legem hic positam se mutuo trahentia moveantur in
Ellipsibus accurate, nisi servando certam proportionem distantiarum ab
invicem. In sequentibus autem casibus non multum ab Ellipsibus errabitur.

_Cas. 1._ Pone corpora plura minora circa maximum aliquod ad varias ab eo
distantias revolvi, tendantq; ad singula vires absolutæ proportionales
iisdem corporibus. Et quoniam omnium commune gravitatis centrum (per Legum
Corol. quartum.) vel quiescet vel movebitur uniformiter in directum,
fingamus corpora minora tam parva esse, ut corpus maximum nunquam distet
sensibiliter ab hoc centro: & maximum illud vel quiescet vel movebitur
uniformiter in directum, absq; errore sensibili; minora autem revolventur
circa hoc maximum in Ellipsibus, atq; radiis ad idem ductis describent
areas temporibus proportionales; nisi quatenus errores inducuntur, vel per
errorem maximi a communi illo gravitatis centro, vel per actiones minorum
corporum in se mutuo. Diminui autem possunt corpora minora usq; donec error
iste & actiones mutuæ sint datis quibusvis minores, atq; adeo donec orbes
cum Ellipsibus quadrent, & areæ respondeant temporibus, absq; errore qui
non sit minor quovis dato.   Q. E. O.

_Cas. 2._ Fingamus jam Systema corporum minorum modo jam descripto circa
maximum revolventium, aliudve quodvis duorum circum se mutuo revolventium
corporum Systema progredi uniformiter in directum, & interea vi corporis
alterius longe maximi & ad magnam distantiam siti urgeri ad latus. Et
quoniam æquales vires acceleratrices, quibus corpora secundum lineas
parallelas urgentur, non mutant situs corporum ad invicem, sed ut Systema
totum, servatis partium motibus inter se, simul transferatur efficiunt:
manifestum est quod ex attractionibus in corpus maximum, nulla prorsus
orietur mutatio motus attractorum inter se, nisi vel ex attractionum
acceleratricum inæqualitate, vel ex inclinatione linearum ad invicem,
secundum quas attractiones fiunt. Pone ergo attractiones omnes
acceleratrices in corpus maximum esse inter se reciproce ut quadrata
distantiarum, & augendo corporis maximi distantiam, donec rectarum ab hoc
ad reliqua ductarum minores sint differentiæ & inclinationes ad invicem
quam datæ quævis, perseverabunt motus partium Systematis inter se absq;
erroribus qui non sint quibusvis datis minores. Et quoniam, ob exiguam
partium illarum ab invicem distantiam, Systema totum ad modum corporis
unius attrahitur, movebitur idem hac attractione ad modum corporis unius;
hoc est, centro suo gravitatis describet circa corpus maximum, Sectionem
aliquam Conicam (_viz._ Hyperbolam vel Parabolam attractione languida,
Ellipsim fortiore,) & Radio ad maximum ducto, verret areas temporibus
proportionales, absq; ullis erroribus, nisi quas partium distantiæ
(perexiguæ sane & pro lubitu minuendæ) valeant efficere.   Q. E. O.

Simili argumento pergere licet ad casus magis compositos in infinitum.

_Corol. 1._ In casu secundo; quo propius accedit corpus omnium maximum ad
Systema duorum vel plurium, eo magis turbabuntur motus partium Systematis
inter se, propterea quod linearum a corpore maximo ad has ductarum jam
major est inclinatio ad invicem, majorq; proportionis inæqualitas.

_Corol. 2._ Maxime autem turbabuntur, ponendo quod attractiones
acceleratrices partium Systematis versus corpus omnium maximum, non sint ad
invicem reciproce ut quadrata distantiarum a corpore illo maximo; præsertim
si proportionis hujus inæqualitas major sit quam inæqualitas proportionis
distantiarum a corpore maximo: Nam si vis acceleratrix, æqualiter &
secundum lineas parallelas agendo, nil perturbat motus inter se, necesse
est ut ex actionis inæqualitate perturbatio oriatur, majorq; sit vel minor
pro majore vel minore inæqualitate. Excessus impulsuum majorum agendo in
aliqua corpora & non agendo in alia, necessario mutabunt situm eorum inter
se. Et hæc perturbatio addita perturbationi, quæ ex linearum inclinatione &
inæqualitate oritur, majorem reddet perturbationem totam.

_Corol. 3._ Unde si Systematis hujus partes in Ellipsibus vel Circulis sine
perturbatione insigni moveantur, manifestum est, quod eædem a viribus
acceleratricibus ad alia corpora tendentibus, aut non urgentur nisi
levissime, aut urgentur æqualiter & secundum lineas parallelas quamproxime.

Prop. LXVI. Theor. XXVI.

    _Si corpora tria, quorum vires decrescunt in duplicata ratione
    distantiarum, se mutuo trahant, & attractiones acceleratrices binorum
    quorumcunq; in tertium sint inter se reciproce ut quadrata
    distantiarum; minora autem circa maximum in plano communi revolvantur:
    Dico quod interius circa intimum & maximum, radiis ad ipsum ductis,
    describet areas temporibus magis proportionales, & figuram ad formam
    Ellipseos umbilicum in concursu radiorum habentis magis accedentem, si
    corpus maximum his attractionibus agitetur, quam si maximum illud vel a
    minoribus non attractum quiescat, vel multo minus vel multo magis
    attractum aut multo minus aut multo magis agitetur._

Liquet fere ex demonstratione Corollarii secundi Propositionis præcedentis;
sed argumento magis distincto & latius cogente sic evincitur.

[Illustration]

_Cas. 1._ Revolvantur corpora minora P & Q in eodem plano circa maximum S,
quorum P describat orbem interiorem PAB, & Q exteriorem QE. Sit QK
mediocris distantia corporum P & Q; & corporis P versus Q attractio
acceleratrix in mediocri illa distantia exponatur per eandem. In duplicata
ratione QK ad QP capiatur QL ad QK, & erit QL attractio acceleratrix
corporis P versus Q in distantia quavis QP. Junge PS, eiq; parallelam age
LM occurrentem QS in M, & attractio QL resolvetur (per Legum Corol. 2.) in
attractiones QM, LM. Et sic urgebitur corpus P vi acceleratrice triplici:
una tendente ad S & oriunda a mutua attractione corporum S & P. Hac vi sola
corpus P, circum corpus S sive immotum, sive hac attractione agitatum,
describere deberet & areas, radio PS temporibus proportionales, & Ellipsin
cui umbilicus est in centro corporis S. Patet hoc per Prob. VI. &
Corollaria Theor. XXI. Vis altera est attractionis LM, quæ quoniam tendit a
P ad S, superaddita vi priori coincidet cum ipsa, & sic faciet ut areæ
etiamnum temporibus proportionales describantur per Corol. 3. Theor. XXI.
At quoniam non est quadrato distantiæ PS reciproce proportionalis, componet
ea cum vi priore vim ab hac proportione aberrantem, idq; eo magis quo major
est proportio hujus vis ad vim priorem, cæteris paribus. Proinde cum (per
Corol. 1. Prob. VIII. & Corol. 2. Theor. XXI.) vis qua Ellipsis circa
umbilicum S describitur tendere debeat ad umbilicum illum, & esse quadrato
distantiæ PS reciproce proportionalis; vis illa composita aberrando ab hac
proportione, faciet ut Orbis PAB aberret a forma Ellipseos umbilicum
habentis in S; idq; eo magis quo major est aberratio ab hac proportione;
atq; adeo etiam quo major est proportio vis secundæ LM ad vim primam,
cæteris paribus. Jam vero vis tertia QM, trahendo corpus P secundum lineam
ipsi QS parallelam, componet cum viribus prioribus vim quæ non amplius
dirigitur a P in S, quæq; ab hac determinatione tanto magis aberrat, quanto
major est proportio hujus tertiæ vis ad vires priores, cæteris paribus;
atq; adeo quæ faciet ut corpus P, radio SP, areas non amplius temporibus
proportionales describet, atq; aberratio ab hac proportionalitate ut tanto
major sit, quanto major est proportio vis hujus tertiæ ad vires cæteras.
Orbis vero PAB aberrationem a forma Elliptica præfata hæc vis tertia
duplici de causa adaugebit, tum quod non dirigitur a P ad S, tum etiam quod
non sit proportionalis quadrato distantiæ PS. Quibus intellectis,
manifestum est quod areæ temporibus tum maxime fiunt proportionales, ubi
vis tertia, manentibus viribus cæteris, fit minima; & quod Orbis PAB tum
maxime accedit ad præfatam formam Ellipticam, ubi vis tam secunda quam
tertia, sed præcipue vis tertia, fit minima, vi prima manente.

Exponatur corporis S attractio acceleratrix versus Q per lineam QN; & si
attractiones acceleratrices QM, QN æquales essent, hæ trahendo corpora S &
P æqualiter & secundum lineas parallelas, nil mutarent situm eorum ad
invicem. Iidem jam forent corporum illorum motus inter se (par Legum Corol.
6.) ac si hæ attractiones tollerentur. Et pari ratione si attractio QN
minor esset attractione QM, tolleret ipsa attractionis QM partem QN, &
maneret pars sola MN, qua temporum & arearum proportionalitas & Orbitæ
forma illa Elliptica perturbaretur. Et similiter si attractio QN major
esset attractione QM, oriretur ex differentia sola MN perturbatio
proportionalitatis & Orbitæ. Sic per attractionem QN reducitur semper
attractio tertia superior QM ad attractionem MN, attractione prima &
secunda manentibus prorsus immutatis: & propterea areæ ac tempora ad
proportionalitatem, & Orbita PAB ad formam præfatam Ellipticam tum maxime
accedunt, ubi attractio MN vel nulla est, vel quam fieri possit minima; hoc
est ubi corporum P & S attractiones acceleratrices, factæ versus corpus Q,
accedunt quantum fieri potest ad æqualitatem; id est ubi attractio QN non
est nulla, neq; minor minima attractionum omnium QM, sed inter attractionum
omnium QM maximam & minimam quasi mediocris, hoc est, non multo major neq;
multo minor attractione QK.   Q. E. D.

_Cas. 2._ Revolvantur jam corpora minora P, Q circa maximum S in planis
diversis, & vis LM, agendo secundum lineam PS in plano Orbitæ PAB sitam,
eundem habebit effectum ac prius, neq; corpus P de plano Orbitæ suæ
deturbabit. At vis altera NM, agendo secundum lineam quæ ipsi QS parallela
est, (atq; adeo, quando corpus Q versatur extra lineam Nodorum, inclinatur
ad planum Orbitæ PAB;) præter perturbationem motus in longitudinem jam ante
expositam, inducet perturbationem motus in latitudinem, trahendo corpus P
de plano suæ Orbitæ. Et hæc perturbatio in dato quovis corporum P & S ad
invicem situ, erit ut vis illa generans MN, adeoq; minima evadet ubi MN est
minima, hoc est (uti jam exposui) ubi attractio QN non est multo major neq;
multo minor attractione QK.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Ex his facile colligitur quod si corpora plura minora P, Q, R
&c. revolvantur circa maximum S: motus corporis intimi P minime
perturbabitur attractionibus exteriorum, ubi corpus maximum S pariter a
cæteris, pro ratione virium acceleratricum, attrahitur & agitatur atq;
cæteri a se mutuo.

_Corol. 2._ In Systemate vero trium corporum S, P, Q; si attractiones
acceleratrices binorum quorumcunq; in tertium sint ad invicem reciproce ut
quadrata distantiarum, corpus P radio PS aream circa corpus S velocius
describet prope conjunctionem A & oppositionem B, quam prope quadraturas C,
D. Namq; vis omnis qua corpus P urgetur & corpus S non urgetur, quæq; non
agit secundum lineam PS, accelerat vel retardat descriptionem areæ, perinde
ut ipsa in antecedentia vel in consequentia dirigitur. Talis est vis NM.
Hæc in transitu corporis P a C ad A tendit in antecedentia, motumq;
accelerat; dein usq; ad D in consequentia, & motum retardat; tum in
antecedentia usq; ad B, & ultimo in consequentia transeundo a B ad C.

_Corol. 3._ Et eodem argumento patet quod corpus P, cæteris paribus,
velocius movetur in Conjunctione & Oppositione quam in Quadraturis.

_Corol. 4._ Orbita corporis P cæteris paribus curvior est in quadraturis
quam in Conjunctione & Oppositione. Nam corpora velociora minus deflectunt
a recto tramite. Et præterea vis NM, in Conjunctione & Oppositione,
contraria est vi qua corpus S trahit corpus P, adeoq; vim illam minuit;
corpus autem P minus deflectet a recto tramite, ubi minus urgetur in corpus
S.

_Corol. 5._ Unde corpus P, cæteris paribus, longius recedet a corpore S in
quadraturis, quam in Conjunctione & Oppositione. Hæc ita se habent excluso
motu Excentricitatis. Nam si Orbita corporis P excentrica sit,
Excentricitas ejus (ut mox in hujus Corol. 9. ostendetur) evadet maxima ubi
Apsides sunt in Syzygiis; indeq; fieri potest ut corpus P, ad Apsidem
summam appellans, absit longius a corpore S in Syzygiis quam in
Quadraturis.

_Corol. 6._ Quoniam vis centripeta corporis centralis S, qua corpus P
retinetur in Orbe suo, augetur in quadraturis per additionem vis LM, ac
diminuitur in Syzygiis per ablationem vis KL, & ob magnitudinem vis KL,
magis diminuitur quam augeatur, est autem vis illa centripeta (per Corol.
2, Prop. IV.) in ratione composita ex ratione simplici radii SP directe &
ratione duplicata temporis periodici inverse: patet hanc rationem
compositam diminui per actionem vis KL, adeoq; tempus periodicum, si maneat
Orbis radius SP, augeri, idq; in dimidiata ratione qua vis illa centripeta
diminuitur: auctoq; adeo vel diminuto hoc Radio, tempus periodicum augeri
magis, vel diminui minus quam in Radii hujus ratione sesquiplicata, per
Corol. 6. Prop. IV. Si vis illa corporis centralis paulatim languesceret,
corpus P minus semper & minus attractum perpetuo recederet longius a centro
S; & contra, si vis illa augeretur, accederet propius. Ergo si actio
corporis longinqui Q, qua vis illa diminuitur, augeatur ac diminuatur per
vices, augebitur simul ac diminuetur Radius SP per vices, & tempus
periodicum augebitur ac diminuetur in ratione composita ex ratione
sesquiplicata Radii & ratione dimidiata qua vis illa centripeta corporis
centralis S per incrementum vel decrementum actionis corporis longinqui Q
diminuitur vel augetur.

_Corol. 7._ Ex præmissis consequitur etiam quod Ellipseos a corpore P
descriptæ axis seu Apsidum linea, quoad motum angularem progreditur &
regreditur per vices, sed magis tamen progreditur, & in singulis corporis
revolutionibus per excessum progressionis fertur in consequentia. Nam vis
qua corpus P urgetur in corpus S in Quadraturis, ubi vis MN evanuit,
componitur ex vi LM & vi centripeta qua corpus S trahit corpus P. Vis prior
LM, si augeatur distantia PS, augetur in eadem fere ratione cum hac
distantia, & vis posterior decrescit in duplicata illa ratione, adeoq;
summa harum virium decrescit in minore quam duplicata ratione distantiæ PS,
& propterea, per Corol. 1. Prop. XLV. facit Augem seu Apsidem summam
regredi. In Conjunctione vero & Oppositione, vis qua corpus P urgetur in
corpus S differentia est inter vim qua corpus S trahit corpus P & vim KL; &
differentia illa, propterea quod vis KL augetur quamproxime in ratione
distantiæ PS, decrescit in majore quam duplicata ratione distantiæ PS,
adeoq; per Corol. 1. Prop. XLV. facit Augem progredi. In locis inter
Syzygias & Quadraturas, pendet motus Augis ex causa utraq; conjunctim, adeo
ut pro hujus vel alterius excessu progrediatur ipsa vel regrediatur. Unde
cum vis KL in Syzygiis sit quasi duplo major quam vis LM in quadraturis,
excessus in tota revolutione erit penes vim KL, transferetq; Augem singulis
revolutionibus in consequentia. Veritas autem hujus & præcedentis
Corollarii facilius intelligetur concipiendo Systema corporum duorum S, P
corporibus pluribus Q, Q, Q &c. in Orbe QE consistentibus, undiq; cingi.
Namq; horum actionibus actio ipsius S minuetur undiq;, decrescetq; in
ratione plusquam duplicata distantiæ.

_Corol. 8._ Cum autem pendeat Apsidum progressus vel regressus a decremento
vis centripetæ facto in majori vel minori quam duplicata ratione distantiæ
SP, in transitu corporis ab Apside ima ad Apsidem summam; ut & a simili
incremento in reditu ad Apsidem imam; atq; adeo maximus sit ubi proportio
vis in Apside summa ad vim in Apside ima maxime recedit a duplicata ratione
distantiarum inversa: manifestum est quod Apsides in Syzygiis suis, per vim
ablatitiam KL seu NM - LM, progredientur velocius, inq; Quadraturis suis
tardius recedent per vim addititiam LM. Ob diuturnitatem vero temporis quo
velocitas progressus vel tarditas regressus continuatur, fit hæc
inæqualitas longe maxima.

_Corol. 9._ Si corpus aliquod vi reciproce proportionali quadrato distantiæ
suæ a centro, revolveretur circa hoc centrum in Ellipsi, & mox, in descensu
ab Apside summa seu Auge ad Apsidem imam, vis illa per accessum perpetuum
vis novæ augeretur in ratione plusquam duplicata distantiæ diminutæ:
Manifestum est quod corpus, perpetuo accessu vis illius novæ impulsum
semper in centrum, magis vergeret in hoc centrum, quam si urgeretur vi sola
crescente in duplicata ratione distantiæ diminutæ, adeoq; Orbem describeret
Orbe Elliptico interiorem, & in Apside ima propius accederet ad centrum
quam prius. Orbis igitur, accessu hujus vis novæ, fiet magis excentricus.
Si jam vis, in recessu corporis ab Apside ima ad Apsidem summam,
decresceret iisdem gradibus quibus ante creverat, rediret corpus ad
distantiam priorem, adeoq; si vis decrescat in majori ratione, corpus jam
minus attractum ascendet ad distantiam majorem & sic Orbis Excentricitas
adhuc magis augebitur. Igitur si ratio incrementi & decrementi vis
centripetæ singulis revolutionibus augeatur, augebitur semper
Excentricitas; & e contra, diminuetur eadem si ratio illa decrescat. Jam
vero in Systemate corporum S, P, Q, ubi Apsides orbis PAB sunt in
quadraturis, ratio illa incrementi ac decrementi minima est, & maxima fit
ubi Apsides sunt in Syzygiis. Si Apsides constituantur in quadraturis ratio
prope Apsides minor est, & prope Syzygias major quam duplicata
distantiarum, & ex ratione illa majori oritur Augis motus velocissimus, uti
jam dictum est. At si consideretur ratio incrementi vel decrementi totius
in progressu inter Apsides, hæc minor est quam duplicata distantiarum. Vis
in Apside ima est ad vim in Apside summa in minore quam duplicata ratione
distantiæ Apsidis summæ ab umbilico Ellipseos ad distantiam Apsidis imæ ab
eodem umbilico: & e contra, ubi Apsides constituuntur in Syzygiis, vis in
Apside ima est ad vim in Apside summa in majore quam duplicata ratione
distantiarum. Nam vires LM in Quadraturis additæ viribus corporis S
componunt vires in ratione minore, & vires KL in Syzygiis subductæ viribus
corporis S relinquunt vires in ratione majore. Est igitur ratio decrementi
& incrementi totius in transitu inter Apsides, minima in quadraturis,
maxima in Syzygiis: & propterea in transitu Apsidum a quadraturis ad
Syzygias perpetuo augetur, augetq; Excentricitatem Ellipseos; inq; transitu
a Syzygiis ad quadraturas perpetuo diminuitur, & Excentricitatem diminuit.

_Corol. 10._ Ut rationem ineamus errorum in latitudinem, fingamus planum
Orbis QES immobile manere; & ex errorum exposita causa manifestum est, quod
ex viribus NM, ML, quæ sunt causa illa tota, vis ML agendo semper secundum
planum Orbis PAB, nunquam perturbat motus in latitudinem, quodq; vis NM ubi
Nodi sunt in Syzygiis, agendo etiam secundum idem Orbis planum, non
perturbat hos motus; ubi vero sunt in Quadraturis eos maxime perturbat,
corpusq; P de plano Orbis sui perpetuo trahendo, minuit inclinationem plani
in transitu corporis a quadraturis ad Syzygias, augetq; vicissim eandem in
transitu a Syzygiis ad quadraturas. Unde fit ut corpore in Syzygiis
existente inclinatio evadat omnium minima, redeatq; ad priorem magnitudinem
circiter, ubi corpus ad Nodum proximum accedit. At si Nodi constituantur in
Octantibus post quadraturas, id est inter C & A, D & B, intelligetur ex
modo expositis quod, in transitu corporis P a Nodo alterutro ad gradum inde
nonagesimum, inclinatio plani perpetuo minuitur; deinde in transitu per
proximos 45 gradus, usq; ad quadraturam proximam, inclinatio augetur, &
postea denuo in transitu per alios 45 gradus, usq; ad nodum proximum,
diminuitur. Magis itaq; diminuitur inclinatio quam augetur, & propterea
minor est semper in nodo subsequente quam in præcedente. Et simili
ratiocinio inclinatio magis augetur quam diminuitur, ubi nodi sunt in
Octantibus alteris inter A & D, B & C. Inclinatio igitur ubi Nodi sunt in
Syzygiis est omnium maxima. In transitu eorum a Syzygiis ad quadraturas, in
singulis corporis ad Nodos appulsibus, diminuitur, fitq; omnium minima ubi
nodi sunt in quadraturis & corpus in Syzygiis: dein crescit iisdem gradibus
quibus antea decreverat, Nodisq; ad Syzygias proximas appulsis ad
magnitudinem primam revertitur.

_Corol. 11._ Quoniam corpus P ubi nodi sunt in quadraturis perpetuo
trahitur de plano Orbis sui, idq; in partem versus Q, in transitu suo a
nodo C per Conjunctionem A ad nodum D; & in contrariam partem in transitu a
nodo D per Oppositionem B ad nodum C; manifestum est quod in motu suo a
nodo C, corpus perpetuo recedit ab Orbis sui plano primo CD, usq; dum
perventum est ad nodum proximum; adeoq; in hoc nodo, longissime distans a
plano illo primo CD, transit per planum Orbis QES, non in plani illius Nodo
altero D, sed in puncto quod inde vergit ad partes corporis Q, quodq;
proinde novus est Nodi locus in anteriora vergens. Et simili argumento
pergent Nodi recedere in transitu Corporis de hoc nodo in nodum proximum.
Nodi igitur in quadraturis constituti perpetuo recedunt, in Syzygiis (ubi
motus in latitudinem nil perturbatur) quiescunt; in locis intermediis
conditionis utriusq; participes recedunt tardius, adeoq; semper vel
retrogradi vel stationarii singulis revolutionibus feruntur in
antecedentia.

_Corol. 12._ Omnes illi in his Corollariis descripti errores sunt paulo
majores in conjunctione Corporum P, Q quam in eorum Oppositione, idq; ob
majores vires generantes NM & ML.

_Corol. 13._ Cumq; rationes horum Corollariorum non pendeant a magnitudine
corporis Q, obtinent præcedentia omnia, ubi corporis Q tanta statuitur
magnitudo ut circa ipsum revolvatur corporum duorum S & P Systema. Et ex
aucto corpore Q, auctaq; adeo ipsius vi centripeta, a qua errores corporis
P oriuntur, evadent errores illi omnes (paribus distantiis) majores in hoc
casu quam in altero, ubi corpus Q circum Systema corporum P & S revolvitur.

_Corol. 14._ Cum autem vires NM, ML, ubi corpus Q longinquum est, sint
quamproxime ut vis QK & ratio PS ad QS conjunctim, hoc est, si detur tum
distantia PS, tum corporis Q vis absoluta, ut QS cub. reciproce; sint autem
vires illæ NM, ML causæ errorum & effectuum omnium de quibus actum est in
præcedentibus Corollariis: manifestum est quod effectus illi omnes, stante
corporum S & P Systemate, sint quamproxime in ratione composita ex ratione
directa vis absolutæ corporis Q & ratione triplicata inversa distantiæ QS.
Unde si Systema corporum S & P revolvatur circa corpus longinquum Q, vires
illæ NM, ML & earum effectus erunt (per Corol. 2. & 6. Prop. IV.) reciproce
in duplicata ratione temporis periodici. Et inde si magnitudo corporis Q
proportionalis sit ipsius vi absolutæ, erunt vires illæ NM, ML & earum
effectus directe ut cubus diametri apparentis longinqui corporis Q e
corpore S spectati, & vice versa. Namq; hæ rationes eædem sunt atq; ratio
superior composita.

_Corol. 15._ Et quoniam si, manentibus Orbium QE & PAB forma,
proportionibus & inclinatione ad invicem, mutetur eorum magnitudo, & si
corporum Q & S vel maneant vel mutentur vires in data quavis ratione, hæ
vires (hoc est vis corporis S, qua corpus P de recto tramite in Orbitam PAB
deflectere, & vis corporis Q, qua corpus idem P de Orbita illa deviare
cogitur) agunt semper eodem modo & eadem proportione: necesse est ut
similes & proportionales sint effectus omnes & proportionalia effectuum
tempora; hoc est, ut errores omnes lineares sint ut Orbium diametri,
angulares vero iidem qui prius, & errorum linearium similium vel angularium
æqualium tempora ut Orbium tempora periodica.

_Corol. 16._ Unde, si dentur Orbium formæ & inclinatio ad invicem, &
mutentur utcunq; corporum magnitudines, vires & distantiæ; ex datis
erroribus & errorum temporibus in uno Casu colligi possunt errores &
errorum tempora in alio quovis, quam proxime: Sed brevius hac Methodo.
Vires NM, ML cæteris stantibus sunt ut Radius SP, & harum effectus
periodici (per Corol. 2, Lem. X) ut vires & quadratum temporis periodici
corporis P conjunctim. Hi sunt errores lineares corporis P; & hinc errores
angulares e centro S spectati (id est tam motus Augis & Nodorum, quam omnes
in longitudinem & latitudinem errores apparentes) sunt in qualibet
revolutione corporis P, ut quadratum temporis revolutionis quam proxime.
Conjungantur hæ rationes cum rationibus Corollarii 14. & in quolibet
corporum S, P, Q Systemate, ubi P circum S sibi propinquum, & S circum Q
longinquum revolvitur, errores angulares corporis P, de centro S
apparentes, erunt, in singulis revolutionibus corporis illius P, ut
quadratum temporis periodici corporis P directe & quadratum temporis
periodici corporis S inverse. Et inde motus medius Augis erit in data
ratione ad motum medium Nodorum; & motus uterq; erit ut tempus periodicum
corporis P directe & quadratum temporis periodici corporis S inverse.
Augendo vel minuendo Excentricitatem & Inclinationem Orbis PAB non mutantur
motus Augis & Nodorum sensibiliter, nisi ubi eædem sunt nimis magnæ.

_Corol. 17._ Cum autem linea LM nunc major si nunc minor quam radius PS,
Exponatur vis mediocris LM per radium illum PS, & erit hæc ad vim mediocrem
QK vel QN (quam exponere licet per QS) ut longitudo PS ad longitudinem QS.
Est autem vis mediocris QN vel QS, qua corpus retinetur in orbe suo circum
Q, ad vim qua corpus P retinetur in Orbe suo circum S, in ratione composita
ex ratione radii QS ad radium PS, & ratione duplicata temporis periodici
corporis P circum S ad tempus periodicum corporis S circum Q. Et ex æquo,
vis mediocris LM, ad vim qua corpus P retinetur in Orbe suo circum S (quave
corpus idem P eodem tempore periodico circum punctum quodvis immobile S ad
distantiam PS revolvi posset) est in ratione illa duplicata periodicorum
temporum. Datis igitur temporibus periodicis una cum distantia PS, datur
vis mediocris LM; & ea data datur etiam vis MN quamproxime per analogiam
linearum PS, MN.

_Corol. 18._ Iisdem legibus quibus corpus P circum corpus S revolvitur,
fingamus corpora plura fluida circum idem S ad æquales ab ipso distantias
moveri; deinde ex his contiguis factis conflari annulum fluidum, rotundum
ac corpori S concentricum; & singulæ annuli partes, motus suos omnes ad
legem corporis P peragendo, propius accedent ad corpus S, & celerius
movebuntur in Conjunctione & Oppositione ipsarum & corporis Q, quam in
Quadraturis. Et Nodi annuli hujus seu intersectiones ejus cum plano Orbitæ
corporis Q vel S, quiescent in Syzygiis; extra Syzygias vero movebuntur in
antecedentia, & velocissime quidem in Quadraturis, tardius aliis in locis.
Annuli quoq; inclinatio variabitur, & axis ejus singulis revolutionibus
oscillabitur, completaq; revolutione ad pristinum situm redibit, nisi
quatenus per præcessionem Nodorum circumfertur.

_Corol. 19._ Fingas jam globum corporis S ex materia non fluida constantem
ampliari & extendi usq; ad hunc annulum, & alveo per circuitum excavato
continere Aquam, motuq; eodem periodico circa axem suum uniformiter
revolvi. Hic liquor per vices acceleratus & retardatus (ut in superiore
Lemmate) in Syzygiis velocior erit, in Quadraturis tardior quam superficies
Globi, & sic fluet in alveo refluetq; ad modum Maris. Aqua revolvendo circa
Globi centrum quiescens, si tollatur attractio Q, nullum acquiret motum
fluxus & refluxus. Par est ratio Globi uniformiter progredientis in
directum & interea revolventis circa centrum suum (per Legum Corol. 5) ut &
Globi de cursa rectilineo uniformiter tracti (per Legum Corol. 6.) Accedat
autem corpus Q, & ab ipsius inæquabili attractione mox turbabitur Aqua.
Etenim major erit attractio aquæ propioris, minor ea remotioris. Vis autem
LM trahet aquam deorsum in Quadraturis, facietq; ipsam descendere usq; ad
Syzygias; & vis KL trahet eandem sursum in Syzygiis, sistetq; descensum
ejus & faciet ipsam ascendere usq; ad Quadraturas.

_Corol. 20._ Si annulus jam rigeat & minuatur Globus, cessabit motus
fluendi & refluendi; sed Oscillatorius ille inclinationis motus & præcessio
Nodorum manebunt. Habeat Globus eundem axem cum annulo, gyrosq; compleat
iisdem temporibus, & superficie sua contingat ipsum interius, eiq;
inhæreat; & participando motum ejus, compages utriusq; Oscillabitur & Nodi
regredientur. Nam Globus, ut mox dicetur, ad suscipiendas impressiones
omnes indifferens est. Annuli Globo orbati maximus inclinationis angulus
est ubi Nodi sunt in Syzygiis. Inde in progressu Nodorum ad Quadraturas
conatur is inclinationem suam minuere, & isto conatu motum imprimit Globo
toti. Retinet Globus motum impressum usq; dum annulus conatu contrario
motum hunc tollat, imprimatq; motum novum in contrariam partem: Atq; hac
ratione maximus decrescentis inclinationis motus fit in Quadraturis
Nodorum, & minimus inclinationis angulus in Octantibus post Quadraturas;
dein maximus reclinationis motus in Syzygiis & maximus angulus in
Octantibus proximis. Et eadem est ratio Globi annulo nudati, qui in
regionibus æquatoris vel altior est paulo quam juxta polos, vel constat ex
materia paulo densiore. Supplet enim vicem annuli iste materiæ in æquatoris
regionibus excessus. Et quanquam, aucta utcunq; Globi hujus vi centripeta,
tendere supponantur omnes ejus partes deorsum, ad modum gravitantium
partium telluris, tamen Phænomena hujus & præcedentis Corollarii vix inde
mutabuntur.

_Corol. 21._ Eadem ratione qua materia Globi juxta æquatorem redundans
efficit ut Nodi regrediantur, atq; adeo per hujus incrementum augetur iste
regressus, per diminutionem vero diminuitur & per ablationem tollitur; si
materia plusquam redundans tollatur, hoc est, si Globus juxta æquatorem vel
depressior reddatur vel rarior quam juxta polos, orietur motus Nodorum in
consequentia.

_Corol. 22._ Et inde vicissim ex motu Nodorum innotescit constitutio Globi.
Nimirum si Globus polos eosdem constanter servat & motus fit in
antecedentia, materia juxta æquatorem redundat; si in consequentia,
deficit. Pone Globum uniformem & perfecte circinatum in spatiis liberis
primo quiescere; dein impetu quocunq; oblique in superficiem suam facto
propelli, & motum inde concipere partim circularem, partim in directum.
Quoniam Globus iste ad axes omnes per centrum suum transeuntes
indifferenter se habet, neq; propensior est in unum axem, unumve axis
situm, quam in alium quemvis; perspicuum est quod is axem suum axisq;
inclinationem vi propria nunquam mutabit. Impellatur jam Globus oblique in
eadem illa superficiei parte qua prius, impulsu quocunq; novo; & cum citior
vel serior impulsus effectum nil mutet, manifestum est quod hi duo impulsus
successive impressi eundem producent motum ac si simul impressi fuissent,
hoc est eundem ac si Globus vi simplici ex utroq; (per Legum Corol. 2.)
composita impulsus fuisset, atq; adeo simplicem, circa axem inclinatione
datum. Et par est ratio impulsus secundi facti in locum alium quemvis in
æquatore motus primi; ut & impulsus primi facti in locum quemvis in
æquatore motus, quem impulsus secundus absq; primo generaret; atq; adeo
impulsuum amborum factorum in loca quæcunq;: Generabunt hi eundem motum
circularem ac si simul & semel in locum intersectionis æquatorum motuum
illorum, quos seorsim generarent, fuissent impressi. Globus igitur
homogeneus & perfectus non retinet motus plures distinctos, sed impressos
omnes componit & ad unum reducit, & quatenus in se est, gyratur semper motu
simplici & uniformi circa axem unicum inclinatione semper invariabili
datum. Sed nec vis centripeta inclinationem axis, aut rotationis
velocitatem mutare potest. Si Globus plano quocunq; per centrum suum &
centrum in quod vis dirigitur transeunte dividi intelligatur in duo
hemisphæria, urgebit semper vis illa utrumq; hemisphærium æqualiter, &
propterea Globum quoad motum rotationis nullam in partem inclinabit.
Addatur vero alicubi inter polum & æquatorem materia nova in formam montis
cumulata, & hæc, perpetuo conatu recedendi a centro sui motus, turbabit
motum Globi, facietq; polos ejus errare per ipsius superficiem, & circulos
circum se punctumq; sibi oppositum perpetuo describere. Neq; corrigetur
ista vagationis enormitas, nisi locando montem illum vel in polo alterutro,
quo in Casu, per Corol. 21, Nodi æquatoris progredientur; vel in æquatore,
qua ratione, per Corol. 20, Nodi regredientur; vel deniq; ex altera axis
parte addendo materiam novam, qua mons inter movendum libretur: & hoc pacto
Nodi vel progredientur, vel recedent, perinde ut mons & hæcce nova materia
sunt vel polo vel æquatori propiores.

Prop. LXVII. Theor. XXVII.

    _Positis iisdem attractionum legibus, dico quod corpus exterius Q,
    circa interiorum P, S commune Gravitatis centrum C, radiis ad centrum
    illud ductis, describit areas temporibus magis proportionales & Orbem
    ad formam Ellipseos umbilicum in centro eodem habentis magis
    accedentem, quam circa corpus intimum & maximum S, radiis ad ipsum
    ductis, describere potest._

Nam corporis Q attractiones versus S & P componunt ipsius attractionem
absolutam, quæ magis dirigitur in corporum S & P commune gravitatis centrum
C, quam in corpus maximum S, quæq; quadrato distantiæ QC magis est
proportionalis reciproce, quam quadrato distantiæ QS: ut rem perpendenti
facile constabit.

Prop. LXVIII. Theor. XXVIII.

    _Positis iisdem attractionum legibus, dico quod corpus exterius Q circa
    interiorum P & S commune gravitatis centrum C, radiis ad centrum illud
    ductis, describit areas temporibus magis proportionales, & Orbem ad
    formam Ellipseos umbilicum in centro eodem habentis magis accedentem,
    si corpus intimum & maximum his attractionibus perinde atq; cætera
    agitetur, quam si id vel non attractum quiescat, vel multo magis aut
    multo minus attractum aut multo magis aut multo minus agitetur._

[Illustration]

Demonstratur eodem fere modo cum Prop. LXVI, sed argumento prolixiore, quod
ideo prætereo. Suffecerit rem sic æstimare. Ex demonstratione Propositionis
novissimæ liquet centrum in quod corpus Q conjunctis viribus urgetur,
proximum esse communi centro gravitatis illorum duorum. Si coincideret hoc
centrum cum centro illo communi, & quiesceret commune centrum gravitatis
corporum trium; describerent corpus Q ex una parte, & commune centrum
aliorum duorum ex altera parte, circa commune omnium centrum quiescens,
Ellipses accuratas. Liquet hoc per Corollarium secundum Propositionis
LVIII. collatum cum demonstratis in Prop. LXIV. & LXV. Perturbatur iste
motus Ellipticus aliquantulum per distantiam centri duorum a centro in quod
tertium Q attrahitur. Detur præterea motus communi trium centro, &
augebitur perturbatio. Proinde minima est perturbatio, ubi commune trium
centrum quiescit, hoc est ubi corpus intimum & maximum S lege cæterorum
attrahitur: fitq; major semper ubi trium commune illud centrum, minuendo
motum corporis S, moveri incipit & magis deinceps magisq; agitatur.

_Corol._ Et hinc si corpora plura minora revolvantur circa maximum,
colligere licet quod Orbitæ descriptæ propius accedent ad Ellipticas, &
arearum descriptiones fient magis æquabiles, si corpora omnia viribus
acceleratricibus, quæ sunt ut eorum vires absolutæ directe & quadrata
distantiarum inverse, se mutuo trahant agitentq;, & Orbitæ cujusq;
umbilicus collocetur in communi centro gravitatis corporum omnium
interiorum (nimirum umbilicus Orbitæ primæ & intimæ in centro gravitatis
corporis maximi & intimi; ille Orbitæ secundæ, in communi centro gravitatis
corporum duorum intimorum; iste tertiæ, in communi centro gravitatis trium
interiorum & sic deinceps) quam si corpus intimum quiescat & statuatur
communis umbilicus orbitarum Omnium.

Prop. LXIX. Theor. XXIX.

    _In Systemate corporum plurium A, B, C, D &c. si corpus aliquod A
    trahit cætera omnia B, C, D &c. viribus acceleratricibus quæ sunt
    reciproce ut quadrata distantiarum a trahente; & corpus aliud B trahit
    etiam cætera A, C, D &c. viribus quæ sunt reciproce ut quadrata
    distantiarum a trahente: erunt absolutæ corporum trahentium A, B vires
    ad invicem, ut sunt ipsa corpora A, B, quorum sunt vires._

Nam attractiones acceleratrices corporum omnium B, C, D versus A, paribus
distantiis, sibi invicem æquantur ex hypothesi, & similiter attractiones
acceleratrices corporum omnium versus B, paribus distantiis, sibi invicem
æquantur. Est autem absoluta vis attractiva corporis A ad vim absolutam
attractivam corporis B, ut attractio acceleratrix corporum omnium versus A
ad attractionem acceleratricem corporum omnium versus B, paribus
distantiis; & ita est attractio acceleratrix corporis B versus A, ad
attractionem acceleratricem corporis A versus B. Sed attractio acceleratrix
corporis B versus A est ad attractionem acceleratricem corporis A versus B,
ut massa corporis A ad massam corporis B; propterea quod vires motrices,
quæ (per Definitionem secundam, septimam & octavam) ex viribus
acceleratricibus in corpora attracta ductis oriuntur, sunt (per motus Legem
tertiam) sibi invicem æquales. Ergo absoluta vis attractiva corporis A est
ad absolutam vim attractivam corporis B, ut massa corporis A ad massam
corporis B.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si singula Systematis corpora A, B, C, D, &c. seorsim
spectata trahant cætera omnia viribus acceleratricibus quæ sint reciproce
ut Quadrata distantiarum a trahente; erunt corporum illorum omnium vires
absolutæ ad invicem ut sunt ipsa corpora.

_Corol. 2._ Eodem argumento, si singula Systematis corpora A, B, C, D &c.
seorsim spectata trahant cætera omnia viribus acceleratricibus quæ sunt vel
reciproce vel directe in ratione dignitatis cujuscunq; distantiarum a
trahente, quæve secundum legem quamcunq; communem ex distantiis ab unoquoq;
trahente definiuntur; constat quod corporum illorum vires absolutæ sunt ut
corpora.

_Corol. 3._ In Systemate corporum, quorum vires decrescunt in ratione
duplicata distantiarum, si minora circa maximum in Ellipsibus umbilicum
communem in maximi illius centro habentibus quam fieri potest
accuratissimis revolvantur, & radiis ad maximum illud ductis describant
areas temporibus quam maxime proportionales: erunt corporum illorum vires
absolutæ ad invicem, aut accurate aut quamproxime in ratione corporum; &
contra. Patet per Corol. Prop. LXVIII. collatum cum hujus Corol. 1.

_Scholium._

His Propositionibus manuducimur ad analogiam inter vires centripetas &
corpora centralia, ad quæ vires illæ dirigi solent. Rationi enim
consentaneum est, ut vires quæ ad corpora diriguntur pendeant ab eorundem
natura & quantitate, ut fit in Magneticis. Et quoties hujusmodi casus
incidunt, æstimandæ erunt corporum attractiones, assignando singulis eorum
particulis vires proprias, & colligendo summas virium. Vocem attractionis
hic generaliter usurpo pro corporum conatu quocunq; accedendi ad invicem;
sive conatus iste fiat ab actione corporum vel se mutuo petentium, vel per
Spiritus emissos se invicem agitantium, sive is ab actione Ætheris aut
Aeris mediive cujuscunq; seu corporei seu incorporei oriatur corpora
innatantia in se invicem utcunq; impellentis. Eodem sensu generali usurpo
vocem impulsus, non species virium & qualitates physicas, sed quantitates &
proportiones Mathematicas in hoc Tractatu expendens; ut in Definitionibus
explicui. In Mathesi investigandæ sunt virium quantitates & rationes illæ,
quæ ex conditionibus quibuscunq; positis consequentur: deinde ubi in
Physicam descenditur, conferendæ sunt hæ rationes cum Phænomenis, ut
innotescat quænam virium conditiones singulis corporum attractivorum
generibus competant. Et tum demum de virium speciebus, causis & rationibus
physicis tutius disputare licebit. Videamus igitur quibus viribus corpora
Sphærica, ex particulis modo jam exposito attractivis constantia, debeant
in se mutuo agere, & quales motus inde consequantur.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. XII.

_De Corporum Sphæricorum Viribus attractivis._

Prop. LXX. Theor. XXX.

[Illustration]

    _Si ad Sphæricæ superficiei puncta singula tendant vires æquales
    centripetæ decrescentes in duplicata ratione distantiarum a punctis:
    dico quod corpusculum intra superficiem constitutum his viribus nullam
    in partem attrahitur._

Sit HIKL superficies illa Sphærica, & P corpusculum intus constitutum. Per
P agantur ad hanc superficiem lineæ duæ HK, IL, arcus quam minimos HI, KL
intercipientes; & ob triangula HPI, LPK (per Corol. 3. Lem. VII.) similia,
arcus illi erunt distantiis HP, LP proportionales, & superficiei Sphæricæ
particulæ quævis, ad HI & KL rectis per punctum P transeuntibus undiq;
terminatæ, erunt in duplicata illa ratione. Ergo vires harum particularum
in corpus P exercitæ sunt inter se aquales. Sunt enim ut particulæ directe
& quadrata distantiarum inverse. Et hæ duæ rationes componunt rationem
æqualitatis. Attractiones igitur in contrarias partes æqualiter factæ se
mutuo destruunt. Et simili argumento attractiones omnes per totam Sphæricam
superficiem a contrariis attractionibus destruuntur. Proinde corpus P
nullam in partem his attractionibus impellitur.   Q. E. D.

Prop. LXXI. Theor. XXXI.

    _Iisdem positis, dico quod corpusculum extra Sphæricam superficiem
    constitutum attrahitur ad centrum Sphæræ, vi reciproce proportionali
    quadrato distantiæ suæ ab eodem centro._

[Illustration]

Sint AHKB, ahkb æquales duæ superficies Sphæricæ, centris S, s, diametris
AB, ab descriptæ, & P, p corpuscula sita extrinsecus in diametris illis
productis. Agantur a corpusculis lineæ PHK, PIL, phk, pil, auferentes a
circulis maximis AHB, ahb, æquales arcus quam minimos HK, hk & HL, hl: Et
ad eas demittantur perpendicula SD, sd; SE, se; IR, ir; quorum SD, sd
secent PL, pl in F & f. Demittantur etiam ad diametros perpendicula IQ, iq;
& ob æquales DS & ds, ES & es, & angulos evanescentes DPE & dpe, lineæ PE,
PF & pe, pf & lineolæ DF, df pro æqualibus habeantur: quippe quarum ratio
ultima, angulis illis DPE, dpe simul evanescentibus, est æqualitatis. His
itaq; constitutis, erit PI ad PF ut RI ad DF, & pf ad pi ut DF vel df ad
ri; & ex æquo PI × pf ad PF × pi ut RI ad ri, hoc est (per Corol. 3. Lem.
VII.) ut arcus IH ad arcum ih. Rursus PI ad PS ut IQ ad SE, & ps ad pi ut
SE vel se ad iq; & ex æquo PI × ps ad PS × pi ut IQ ad iq. Et conjunctis
rationibus PI quad. × pf × ps ad pi quad. × PF × PS, ut IH × IQ ad ih × iq;
hoc est, ut superficies circularis, quam arcus IH convolutione semicirculi
AKB circa diametrum AB describet, ad superficiem circularem, quam arcus ih
convolutione semicirculi akb circa diametrum ab describet. Et vires, quibus
hæ superficies secundum lineas ad se tendentes attrahunt corpuscula P & p,
sunt (per Hypothesin) ut ipsæ superficies applicatæ ad quadrata
distantiarum suarum a corporibus, hoc est, ut pf × ps ad PF × PS. Suntq; hæ
vires ad ipsarum partes obliquas quæ (facta per Legum Corol. 2 resolutione
virium) secundum lineas PS, ps ad centra tendunt, ut PI ad PQ, & pi ad pq;
id est (ob similia triangula PIQ & PSF, piq & psf) ut PS ad PF & ps ad pf.
Unde ex æquo fit attractio corpusculi hujus P versus S ad attractionem
corpusculi p versus s, ut PF × pf × ps ÷ PS ad pf × PF × PS ÷ ps, hoc es ut
ps quad. ad PS quad. Et simili argumento vires, quibus superficies
convolutione arcuum KL, kl descriptæ trahunt corpuscula, erunt ut ps quad.
ad PS quad.; inq; eadem ratione erunt vires superficierum omnium
circularium in quas utraq; superficies Sphærica, capiendo semper sd = SD &
se = SE, distingui potest. Et per Compositionem, vires totarum
superficierum Sphæricarum in corpuscula exercitæ erunt in eadem ratione.
_Q. E. D._

Prop. LXXII. Theor. XXXII.

    _Si ad Spheræ cujusvis puncta singula tendant vires æquales centripetæ
    decrescentes in duplicata ratione distantiarum a punctis, ac detur
    ratio diametri Spheræ ad distantiam corpusculi a centro ejus; dico quod
    vis qua corpusculum attrahitur proportionalis erit semi-diametro
    Sphæræ._

Nam concipe corpuscula duo seorsim a Sphæris duabus attrahi, & distantias a
centris proportionales esse diametris, Sphæras autem resolvi in particulas
similes & similiter positas ad corpuscula. Hinc attractiones corpusculi
unius, factæ versus singulas particulas Sphæræ unius, erunt ad attractiones
alterius versus analogas totidem particulas Sphæræ alterius, in ratione
composita ex ratione particularum directe & ratione duplicata distantiarum
inverse. Sed particulæ sunt ut Sphæræ, hoc est in ratione triplicata
diametrorum, & distantiæ sunt ut diametri, & ratio prior directe una cum
ratione posteriore bis inverse est ratio diametri ad diametrum.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si corpuscula in circulis circa Sphæras ex materia
æqualiter attractiva constantes revolvantur, sintq; distantiæ a centris
Sphærarum proportionales earundem diametris; tempora periodica erunt
æqualia.

_Corol. 2._ Et vice versa, si tempora periodica sunt æqualia; distantiæ
erunt proportionales diametris. Constant hæc duo per Corol. 3. Theor. IV.

Prop. LXXIII. Theor. XXXIII.

[Illustration]

    _Si ad sphæræ alicujus datæ puncta singula tendant æquales vires
    centripetæ decrescentes in duplicata ratione distantiarum a punctis:
    dico quod corpusculum intra Sphæram constitutum attrahitur vi
    proportionali distantiæ suæ ab ipsius centro._

In Sphæra ABCD, centro S descripta, locetur corpusculum P, & centro eodem S
intervallo SP concipe Sphæram interiorem PEQF describi. Manifestum est, per
Theor. XXX. quod Sphæricæ superficies concentricæ, ex quibus Sphærarum
differentia AEBF componitur, attractionibus per attractiones contrarias
destructis, nil agunt in corpus P. Restat sola attractio Sphæræ interioris
PEQF. Et per Theor. XXXII, hæc est ut distantia PS.   Q. E. D.

_Scholium._

Superficies ex quibus solida componuntur, hic non sunt pure Mathematicæ,
sed Orbes adeo tenues ut eorum crassitudo instar nihili sit; nimirum Orbes
evanescentes ex quibus Sphæra ultimo constat, ubi Orbium illorum numerus
augetur & crassitudo minuitur in infinitum, juxta Methodum sub initio in
Lemmatis generalibus expositam. Similiter per puncta, ex quibus lineæ,
superficies & solida componi dicuntur, intelligendæ sunt particulæ æquales
magnitudinis contemnendæ.

Prop. LXXIV. Theor. XXXIV.

    _Iisdem positis, dico quod corpusculum extra Sphæram constitutum
    attrahitur vi reciproce proportionali quadrato distantiæ suæ ab ipsius
    centro._

Nam distinguatur Sphæra in superficies Sphæricas innumeras concentricas, &
attractiones corpusculi a singulis superficiebus oriundæ erunt reciproce
proportionales quadrato distantiæ corpusculi a centro, per Theor. XXXI. Et
componendo, fiet summa attractionum, hoc est attractio Sphæræ totius, in
eadem ratione.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc in æqualibus distantiis a centris homogenearum Sphærarum,
attractiones sunt ut Sphæræ. Nam per Theor. XXXII. si distantiæ sunt
proportionales diametris Sphærarum, vires erunt ut diametri. Minuatur
distantia major in illa ratione, & distantiis jam factis æqualibus,
augebitur attractio in duplicata illa ratione, adeoq; erit ad attractionem
alteram in triplicata illa ratione, hoc est in ratione Sphærarum.

_Corol. 2._ In distantiis quibusvis attractiones sunt ut Sphæræ applicatæ
ad quadrata distantiarum.

_Corol. 3._ Si corpusculum extra Sphæram homogeneam positum trahitur vi
reciproce proportionali quadrato distantiæ suæ ab ipsius centro, constet
autem Sphæra ex particulis attractivis; decrescet vis particulæ cujusq; in
duplicata ratione distantiæ a particula.

Prop. LXXV. Theor. XXXV.

    _Si ad Sphæræ datæ puncta singula tendant vires æquales centripetæ
    decrescentes in duplicata ratione distantiarum a punctis, dico quod
    Sphæra quævis alia similaris attrahitur vi reciproce proportionali
    quadrato distantiæ centrorum._

Nam particulæ cujusvis attractio est reciproce ut quadratum distantiæ ejus
a centro Sphæræ trahentis, (per Theor. XXXI,) & propterea eadem est ac si
vis tota attrahens manaret de corpusculo unico sito in centro hujus Sphæræ.
Hæc autem attractio tanta est quanta foret vicissim attractio corpusculi
ejusdem, si modo illud a singulis Sphæræ attractæ particulis eadem vi
traheretur qua ipsas attrahit. Foret autem illa corpusculi attractio (per
Theor. XXXIV) reciproce proportionalis quadrato distantiæ ejus a centro
Sphæræ; adeoq; huic æqualis attractio Sphæræ est in eadem ratione.
Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Attractiones Sphærarum, versus alias Sphæras homogeneas, sunt
ut Sphæræ trahentes applicatæ ad quadrata distantiarum centrorum suorum a
centris earum quas attrahunt.

_Corol. 2._ Idem valet ubi Sphæra attracta etiam attrahit. Namq; hujus
puncta singula trahent singula alterius, eadem vi qua ab ipsis vicissim
trahuntur, adeoq; cum in omni attractione urgeatur (per Legem 3.) tam
punctum attrahens, quam punctum attractum, geminabitur vis attractionis
mutuæ, conservatis proportionibus.

_Corol. 3._ Eadem omnia, quæ superius de motu corporum circa umbilicum
Conicarum Sectionum demonstrata sunt, obtinent ubi Sphæra attrahens locatur
in umbilico & corpora moventur extra Sphæram.

_Corol. 4._ Ea vero quæ de motu corporum circa centrum Conicarum Sectionum
demonstrantur, obtinent ubi motus peraguntur intra Sphæram.

Prop. LXXVI. Theor. XXXVI.

    _Si Sphæræ in progressu a centro ad circumferentiam (quod materiæ
    densitatem & vim attractivam) utcunq; dissimilares, in progressu vero
    per circuitum ad datam omnem a centro distantiam sunt undiq; similares,
    & vis attractiva puncti cujusq; decrescit in duplicata ratione
    distantiæ corporis attracti: dico quod vis tota qua hujusmodi Sphæra
    una attrahit aliam sit reciproce proportionalis quadrato distantiæ
    centrorum._

[Illustration]

Sunto Sphæræ quotcunq; concentricæ similares AB, CD, EF &c. quarum
interiores additæ exterioribus componant materiam densiorem versus centrum,
vel subductæ relinquant tenuiorem; & hæ, per Theor. XXXV, trahent Sphæras
alias quotcunq; concentricas similares GH, IK, LM, &c. singulæ singulas,
viribus reciproce proportionalibus quadrato distantiæ SP. Et componendo vel
dividendo, summa virium illarum omnium, vel excessus aliquarum supra alias,
hoc est, vis qua Sphæra tota ex concentricis quibuscunq; vel concentricarum
differentiis composita AB, trahit totam ex concentricis quibuscunq; vel
concentricarum differentiis compositam GH, erit in eadem ratione. Augeatur
numerus Sphærarum concentricarum in infinitum sic, ut materiæ densitas una
cum vi attractiva, in progressu a circumferentia ad centrum, secundum Legem
quamcunq; crescat vel decrescat: & addita materia non attractiva compleatur
ubivis densitas deficiens, eo ut Sphæræ acquirant formam quamvis optatam; &
vis qua harum una attrahet alteram erit etiamnum (per argumentum superius)
in eadem illa distantiæ quadratæ ratione inversa.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si ejusmodi Sphæræ complures sibi invicem per omnia
similes se mutuo trahant; attractiones acceleratrices singularum in
singulas erunt in æqualibus quibusvis centrorum distantiis ut Sphæræ
attrahentes.

_Corol. 2._ Inq; distantiis quibusvis inæqualibus, ut Sphæræ attrahentes
applicatæ ad quadrata distantiarum inter centra.

_Corol. 3._ Attractiones vero motrices, seu pondera Sphærarum in Sphæras
erunt, in æqualibus centrorum distantiis, ut Sphæræ attrahentes & attractæ
conjunctim, id est, ut contenta sub Sphæris per multiplicationem producta.

_Corol. 4._ Inq; distantiis inæqualibus, ut contenta illa applicata ad
quadrata distantiarum inter centra.

_Corol. 5._ Eadem valent ubi attractio oritur a Sphæræ utriusq; virtute
attractiva, mutuo exercita in Sphæram alteram. Nam viribus ambabus
geminatur attractio, proportione servata.

_Corol. 6._ Si hujusmodi Sphæræ aliquæ circa alias quiescentes revolvantur,
singulæ circa singulas, sintq; distantiæ inter centra revolventium &
quiescentium proportionales quiescentium diametris; æqualia erunt tempora
periodica.

_Corol. 7._ Et vicissim, si tempora periodica sunt æqualia, distantiæ erunt
proportionales diametris.

_Corol. 8._ Eadem omnia, quæ superius de motu corporum circa umbilicos
Conicarum Sectionum demonstrata sunt, obtinent ubi Sphæra attrahens, formæ
& conditionis cujusvis jam descriptæ, locatur in umbilico.

_Corol. 9._ Ut & ubi gyrantia sunt etiam Sphæræ attrahentes, conditionis
cujusvis jam descriptæ.

Prop. LXXVII. Theor. XXXVII.

    _Si ad singula Sphærarum puncta tendant vires centripetæ proportionales
    distantiis punctorum a corporibus attractis: dico quod vis composita,
    qua Sphæræ duæ se mutuo trahent, est ut distantia inter centra
    Sphærarum._

[Illustration]

_Cas. 1._ Sit ACBD Sphæra, S centrum ejus, P corpusculum attractum, PASB
axis Sphæræ per centrum corpusculi transiens, EF, ef plana duo quibus
Sphæra secatur, huic axi perpendicularia, & hinc inde æqualiter distantia a
centro Sphæræ; Gg intersectiones planorum & axis, & H punctum quodvis in
plano EF. Puncti H vis centripeta in corpusculum P secundum lineam PH
exercita est ut distantia PH, & (per Legum Corol. 2.) secundum lineam PG,
seu versus centrum S, ut longitudo PG. Igitur punctorum omnium in plano EF,
hoc est plani totius vis, qua corpusculum P trahitur versus centrum S, est
ut numerus punctorum ductus in distantiam PG: id est ut contentum sub plano
ipso EF & distantia illa PG. Et similiter vis plani ef, qua corpusculum P
trahitur versus centrum S, est ut planum illud ductum in distantiam suam
Pg; sive ut huic æquale planum EF ductum in distantiam illam Pg; & summa
virium plani utriusq; ut planum EF ductum in summam distantiarum PG + Pg,
id est, ut planum illud ductum in duplam centri & corpusculi distantiam PS,
hoc est, ut duplum planum EF ductum in distantiam PS, vel ut summa æqualium
planorum EF + ef ducta in distantiam eandem. Et simili argumento, vires
omnium planorum in Sphæra tota, hinc inde æqualiter a centro Sphæræ
distantium, sunt ut summa planorum ducta in distantiam PS, hoc est, ut
Sphæra tota ducta in distantiam centri sui S a corpusculo P.   Q. E. D.

_Cas. 2._ Trahat jam corpusculum P Sphæram ACBD. Et eodem argumento
probabitur quod vis, qua Sphæra illa trahitur, erit ut distantia PS.
Q. E. D.

_Cas. 3._ Componatur jam Sphæra altera ex corpusculis innumeris P; &
quoniam vis, qua corpusculum unumquodq; trahitur, est ut distantia
corpusculi a centro Sphæræ primæ ducta in Sphæram eandem, atq; adeo eadem
est ac si prodiret tota de corpusculo unico in centro Sphæræ; vis tota qua
corpuscula omnia in Sphæra secunda trahuntur, hoc est, qua Sphæra illa tota
trahitur, eadem erit ac si Sphæra illa traheretur vi prodeunte de
corpusculo unico in centro Sphæræ primæ, & propterea proportionalis est
distantiæ inter centra Sphærarum.   Q. E. D.

_Cas. 4._ Trahant Sphæræ se mutuo, & vis geminata proportionem priorem
servabit.   Q. E. D.

_Cas. 5._ Locetur jam corpusculum p intra Sphæram ACBD, & quoniam vis plani
ef in corpusculum est ut contentum sub plano illo & distantia pg; & vis
contraria plani EF ut contentum sub plano illo & distantia pG; erit vis ex
utraq; composita ut differentia contentorum, hoc est, ut summa æqualium
planorum ducta in semissem differentiæ distantiarum, id est, ut summa illa
ducta in pS, distantiam corpusculi a centro Sphæræ. Et simili argumento
attractio planorum omnium EF, ef in Sphæra tota, hoc est attractio Sphæræ
totius, est ut summa planorum omnium, seu Sphæra tota, ducta in pS
distantiam corpusculi a centro Sphæræ.   Q. E. D.

_Cas. 6._ Et si ex corpusculis innumeris p componatur Sphæra nova intra
Sphæram priorem ACBD sita, probabitur ut prius, quod attractio, sive
simplex Sphæræ unius in alteram, sive mutua utriusq; in se invicem, erit ut
distantia centrorum pS.   Q. E. D.

Prop. LXXVIII. Theor. XXXVIII.

    _Si Sphæræ in progressu a centro ad circumferentiam sint utcunq;
    dissimilares & inæquabiles, in progressu vero per circuitum ad datam
    omnem a centro distantiam sint undiq; similares; & vis attractiva
    puncti cujusq; sit ut distantia corporis attracti: dico quod vis tota
    qua hujusmodi Sphæræ duæ se mutuo trahunt sit proportionalis distantiæ
    inter centra Sphærarum._

Demonstratur ex Propositione præcedente, eodem modo quo Propositio LXXVII.
ex Propositione LXXV. demonstrata fuit.

_Corol._ Quæ superius in Propositionibus X. & LXIV. de motu corporum circa
centra Conicarum Sectionum demonstrata sunt, valent ubi attractiones omnes
fiunt vi Corporum Sphæricorum, conditionis jam descriptæ, suntq; corpora
attracta Sphæræ conditionis ejusdem.

_Scholium._

Attractionum Casus duos insigniores jam dedi expositos; nimirum ubi vires
centripetæ decrescunt in duplicata distantiarum ratione, vel crescunt in
distantiarum ratione simplici; efficientes in utroq; Casu ut corpora
gyrentur in Conicis Sectionibus, & componentes corporum Sphæricorum vires
centripetas eadem lege in recessu a centro decrescentes vel crescentes cum
seipsis. Quod est notatu dignum. Casus cæteros, qui conclusiones minus
elegantes exhibent, sigillatim percurrere longum esset: Malim cunctos
methodo generali simul comprehendere ac determinare, ut sequitur.

Lemma XXIX.

    _Si describantur centro S circulus quilibet AEB,_ (Vide Fig. Prop.
    sequentis) _& centro P circuli duo EF, ef, secantes priorem in E, e,
    lineamq; PS in F, f; & ad PS demittantur perpendicula ED, ed: dico quod
    si distantia arcuum EF, ef in infinitum minui intelligatur, ratio
    ultima lineæ evanescentis Dd ad lineam evanescentem Ff ea sit, quæ
    lineæ PE ad lineam PS._

Nam si linea Pe secet arcum EF in q; & recta Ee, quæ cum arcu evanescente
Ee coincidit, producta occurrat rectæ PS in T; & ab S demittatur in PE
normalis SG: ob similia triangula EDT, edt, EDS; erit Dd ad Ee, ut DT ad ET
seu DE ad ES, & ob triangula Eqe, ESG (per Lem. VIII. & Corol. 3. Lem.
VII.) similia, erit Ee ad qe seu Ff, ut ES ad SG, & ex æquo Dd ad Ff ut DE
ad SG; hoc est (ob similia triangula PDE, PGS) ut PE ad PS.   Q. E. D.

Prop. LXXIX. Theor. XXXIX.

    _Si superficies ob latitudinem infinite diminutam jamjam evanescens
    EFfe, convolutione sui circa axem PS, describat solidum Sphæricum
    concavo-convexum, ad cujus particulas singulas æquales tendant æquales
    vires centripetæ: dico quod vis, qua solidum illud trahit corpusculum
    situm in P, est in ratione composita ex ratione solidi DEq. × Ff &
    ratione vis qua particula data in loco Ff traheret idem corpusculum._

[Illustration]

Nam si primo consideremus vim superficiei Sphæricæ FE, quæ convolutione
arcus FE generatur, & linea de ubivis secatur in r; erit superficiei pars
annularis, convolutione arcus rE genita, ut lineola Dd, manente Sphæræ
radio PE, (uti demonstravit Archimedes in Lib. de Sphæra & Cylindro.) Et
hujus vis secundum lineas PE vel Pr undiq; in superficie conica sitas
exercita, ut hæc ipsa superficiei pars annularis; hoc est, ut lineola Dd,
vel quod perinde est, ut rectangulum sub dato Sphæræ radio PE & lineola
illa Dd: at secundum lineam PS ad centrum S tendentem minor, in ratione PD
ad PE, adeoq; ut PD × Dd. Dividi jam intelligatur linea DF in particulas
innumeras æquales, quæ singulæ nominentur Dd; & superficies FE dividetur in
totidem æquales annulos, quorum vires erunt ut summa omnium PD × Dd, hoc
est, cum lineolæ omnes Dd sibi invicem æquentur, adeoq; pro datis haberi
possint, ut summa omnium PD ducta in Dd, id est, ut ½PFq. - ½PDq. sive
½PEq. - ½PDq. vel ½DEq. ductum in Dd; hoc est, si negligatur data ½Dd, ut
DE quad. Ducatur jam superficies FE in altitudinem Ff; & fiet solidi EFfe
vis exercita in corpusculum P ut DEq. × Ff: puta si detur vis quam
particula aliqua data Ff in distantia PF exercet in corpusculum P. At si
vis illa non detur, fiet vis solidi EFfe ut solidum DEq. × Ff & vis illa
non data conjunctim.   Q. E. D.

Prop. LXXX. Theor. XL.

    _Si ad Sphæræ alicujus AEB, centro S descriptæ, particulas singulas
    æquales tendant æquales vires centripetæ, & ad Sphæræ axem AB, in quo
    corpusculum aliquod P locatur, erigantur de punctis singulis D
    perpendicula DE, Sphæræ occurrentia in E, & in ipsis capiantur
    longitudines DN, quæ sint ut quantitas DEq. × PS ÷ PE & vis quam Sphæræ
    particula sita in axe ad distantiam PE exercet in corpusculum P
    conjunctim: dico quod vis tota, qua corpusculum P trahitur versus
    Sphæram, est ut area comprehensa sub axe Sphæræ AB & linea curva ANB,
    quam punctum N perpetuo tangit._

Etenim stantibus quæ in Lemmate & Theoremate novissimo constructa sunt,
concipe axem Sphæræ AB dividi in particulas innumeras æquales Dd, & Sphæram
totam dividi in totidem laminas Sphæricas concavo-convexas EFfe; & erigatur
perpendiculum dn. Per Theorema superius, vis qua lamina EFfe trahit
corpusculum P est ut DEq. × Ff & vis particulæ unius ad distantiam PE vel
PF exercita conjunctim. Est autem per Lemma novissimum, Dd ad Ff ut PE ad
PS, & inde Ff æqualis PS × Dd ÷ PE; & DEq. × Ff æquale Dd in DEq. × PS ÷
PE, & propterea vis laminæ EFfe est ut Dd in DEq. × PS ÷ PE & vis particulæ
ad distantiam PF exercita conjunctim, hoc est (ex Hypothesi) ut DN × Dd,
seu area evanescens DNnd. Sunt igitur laminarum omnium vires in corpus P
exercitæ, ut areæ omnes DNnd, hoc est Sphæræ vis tota ut area tota ABNA.
Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si vis centripeta, ad particulas singulas tendens, eadem
semper maneat in omnibus distantiis, & fiat DN ut DEq. × PS ÷ PE: erit vis
tota qua corpusculum a Sphæra attrahitur, ut area ABNA.

_Corol. 2._ Si particularum vis centripeta sit reciproce ut distantia
corpusculi a se attracti, & fiat DN ut DEq. × PS ÷ PEq.: erit vis qua
corpusculum P a Sphæra tota attrahitur ut area ABNA.

_Corol. 3._ Si particularum vis centripeta sit reciproce ut cubus distantiæ
corpusculi a se attracti, & fiat DN ut DEq. × PS ÷ PEqq.: erit vis qua
corpusculum a tota Sphæra attrahitur ut area ABNA.

_Corol. 4._ Et universaliter si vis centripeta ad singulas Sphæræ
particulas tendens ponatur esse reciproce ut quantitas V, fiat autem DN ut
{DEq. × PS} ÷ {PE × V}; erit vis qua corpusculum a Sphæra tota attrahitur
ut area ABNA.

Prop. LXXXI. Prob. XLI.

[Illustration]

    _Stantibus jam positis, mensuranda est Area ABNA._

A puncto P ducatur recta PH Sphæram tangens in H, & ad axem PAB demissa
Normali HI, bisecetur PI in L; & erit (per Prop. 12, Lib. 2. Elem.) PEq.
æquale PSq. + SEq. + 2PSD. Est autem SEq. seu SHq. (ob similitudinem
triangulorum SPH, SHI) æquale rectangulo PSI. Ergo PEq. æquale est contento
sub PS & PS + SI + 2SD, hoc est, sub PS & 2LS + 2SD, id est, sub PS & 2LD.
Porro DE quad. æquale est SEq. - SDq. seu SEq. - LSq. + 2SLD - LDq. id est,
SLD - LDq. - ALB. Nam LSq. - SEq. seu LSq. - SAq. (per Prop. 6 Lib. 2.
Elem) æquatur rectangulo ALB. Scribatur itaq; 2SLD - LDq. - ALB pro DEq. &
quantitas {DEq. × PS} ÷ {PE × V}, quæ secundum Corollarium quartum
Propositionis præcedentis est ut longitudo ordinatim applicatæ DN, resolvet
sese in tres partes

  2SLD × PS   LDq. × PS   ALB × PS
  ­-------- - ­-------- - ­--------:
   PE × V      PE × V      PE × V

[Illustration]

ubi si pro V scribatur ratio inversa vis centripetæ, & pro PE medium
proportionale inter PS & 2LD; tres illæ partes evadent ordinatim applicatæ
linearum totidem curvarum, quarum areæ per Methodos vulgatas innotescunt.
Q. E. F.

_Exempl. 1._ Si vis centripeta ad singulas Sphæræ particulas tendens sit
reciproce ut distantia; pro V scribe distantiam PE, dein 2PS × LD pro PEq.,
& fiet DN ut SL - ½LD - ALB ÷ 2LD. Pone DN æqualem duplo ejus 2SL - LD -
ALB ÷ LD: & ordinatæ pars data 2SL ducta in longitudinem AB describet aream
rectangulam 2SL × AB; & pars indefinita LD ducta normaliter in eandem
longitudinem per motum continuum, ea lege ut inter movendum crescendo vel
decrescendo æquetur semper longitudini LD, describet aream {LBq. - LAq.} ÷
2, id est, aream SL × AB; quæ subducta de area priore 2SL × AB relinquit
aream SL × AB. Pars autem tertia ALB ÷ LD ducta itidem per motum localem
normaliter in eandem longitudinem, describet aream Hyperbolicam; quæ
subducta de area SL × AB relinquet aream quæsitam ABNA. Unde talis emergit
Problematis constructio. Ad puncta L, A, B erige perpendicula Ll, Aa, Bb,
quorum Aa ipsi LB, & Bb ipsi LA æquetur. Asymptotis Ll, LB, per puncta a, b
describatur Hyperbola ab. Et acta chorda ba claudet aream aba areæ quæsitæ
ABNA æqualem.

[Illustration]

_Exempl. 2._ Si vis centripeta ad singulas Sphæræ particulas tendens sit
reciproce ut cubus distantiæ, vel (quod perinde est) ut cubus ille
applicatus ad planum quodvis datum; scribe PE cub. ÷ 2ASq. pro V, dein 2PS
× LD pro PEq.; & fiet DN ut

  SL × ASq.  ASq.   ALB × ASq.
  -------- - ---- - ----------
   PS × LD   2PS    2PS × LDq.

id est (ob continue proportionales PS, AS, SI) ut

  LSI           ALB × SI
  --- - 1/2SI - --------.
  LD              2LDq.

Si ducantur hujus partes tres in longitudinem AB, prima LSI ÷ LD generabit
aream Hyperbolicam; secunda ½SI aream ½AB × SI; tertia ALB × SI ÷ 2LDq.
aream

  ALB × SI   ALB × SI
  -------- - --------,
    2LA        2LB

id est ½AB × SI. De prima subducatur summa secundæ ac tertiæ, & manebit
area quæsita ABNA. Unde talis emergit Problematis constructio. Ad puncta L,
A, S, B erige perpendicula Ll, Aa, Ss, Bb, quorum Ss ipsi SI æquetur, perq;
punctum s Asymptotis Ll, LB describatur Hyperbola asb occurrens
perpendiculis Aa, Bb in a & b; & rectangulum 2ASI subductum de area
Hyperbolica AasbB relinquet aream quæsitam ABNA.

_Exempl. 3._ Si Vis centripeta, ad singulas Sphæræ particulas tendens,
decrescit in quadruplicata ratione distantiæ a particulis, scribe PE^4 ÷
2AS^3 pro V, dein [sqrt]2PS × LD pro PE, & fiet DN ut

    SL × SI^{3/2}           SI^{3/2}           ALB × SI^{3/2}
  ------------------ - ------------------- - -------------------.
  [sqrt]2 × LD^{3/2}   2[sqrt]2 × LD^{1/2}   2[sqrt]2 × LD^{5/2}

Cujus tres partes ductæ in longitudinem AB, producunt Areas totidem, _viz._

  [sqrt]2 × SL × SI^{3/2}   [sqrt]2 × SL × SI^{3/2}
  ----------------------- - -----------------------,
          LA^{1/2}                  LB^{1/2}

  LB^{1/2} × SI^{3/2} - LA^{1/2} - SI^{3/2}
  ----------------------------------------- &
                   [sqrt]2

     ALB × SI^{3/2}        ALB × SI^{3/2}
  ------------------- - -------------------.
  3[sqrt]2 × LA^{3/2}   3[sqrt]2 × LB^{3/2}

Et hæ post debitam reductionem, subductis posterioribus de priori, evadunt
8SI cub. ÷ 3LI. Igitur vis tota, qua corpusculum P in Sphæræ centrum
trahitur, est ut SI cub. ÷ PI, id est reciproce ut PS cub. × PI.   Q. E. I.

Eadem Methodo determinari potest attractio corpusculi siti intra Sphæram,
sed expeditius per Theorema sequens.

Prop. LXXXII. Theor. XLI.

    _In Sphæra centro S intervallo SA descripta, si capiantur SI, SA, SP
    continue proportionales: dico quod corpusculi intra Sphæram in loco
    quovis I attractio est ad attractionem ipsius extra Sphæram in loco P,
    in ratione composita ex dimidiata ratione distantiarum a centro IS, PS
    & dimidiata ratione virium centripetarum, in locis illis P & I, ad
    centrum tendentium._

[Illustration]

Ut si vires centripetæ particularum Sphæræ sint reciproce ut distantiæ
corpusculi a se attracti; vis, qua corpusculum situm in I trahitur a Sphæra
tota, erit ad vim qua trahitur in P, in ratione composita ex dimidiata
ratione distantiæ SI ad distantiam SP & ratione dimidiata vis centripetæ in
loco I, a particula aliqua in centro oriundæ, ad vim centripetam in loco P
ab eadem in centro particula oriundam, id est, ratione dimidiata
distantiarum SI, SP ad invicem reciproce. Hæ duæ rationes dimidiatæ
componunt rationem æqualitatis, & propterea attractiones in I & P a Sphæra
tota factæ æquantur. Simili computo, si vires particularum Sphæræ sunt
reciproce in duplicata ratione distantiarum, colligetur quod attractio in I
sit ad attractionem in P, ut distantia SP ad Sphæræ semidiametrum SA: Si
vires illæ sunt reciproce in triplicata ratione distantiarum, attractiones
in I & P erunt ad invicem ut SP quad. ad SA quad.; si in quadruplicata, ut
SP cub. ad SA cub. Unde cum attractio in P, in hoc ultimo casu, inventa
fuit reciproce ut PS cub. × PI, attractio in I erit reciproce ut SA cub. ×
PI, id est (ob datum SA cub.) reciproce ut PI. Et similis est progressus in
infinitum. Theorema vero sic demonstratur.

Stantibus jam ante constructis, & existente corpore in loco quovis P,
ordinatim applicata DN inventa fuit ut {DEq. × PS} ÷ {PE × V}. Ergo si
agatur IE, ordinata illa ad alium quemvis locum I, mutatis mutandis, evadet
ut {DEq. × IS} ÷ {IE × V}. Pone vires centripetas, e Sphæræ puncto quovis E
manantes, esse ad invicem in distantiis IE, PE, ut PE^n ad IE^n, (ubi
numerus n designet indicem potestatum PE & IE) & ordinatæ illæ fient ut
{DEq. × PS} ÷ {PE × PE^n} & {DEq. × IS} ÷ {IE × IE^n}, quarum ratio ad
invicem est ut PS × IE × IE^n ad IS × PE × PE^n. Quoniam ob similia
triangula SPE, SEI, fit IE ad PE ut IS ad SE vel SA; pro ratione IE ad PE
scribe rationem IS ad SA; & ordinatarum ratio evadet PS × IE^n ad SA ×
PE^n. Sed PS ad SA dimidiata est ratio distantiarum PS, SI; & IE^n ad PE^n
dimidiata est ratio virium in distantiis PS, IS. Ergo ordinatæ, & propterea
areæ quas ordinatæ describunt, hisq; proportionales attractiones, sunt in
ratione composita ex dimidiatis illis rationibus.   Q. E. D.

Prop. LXXXIII. Prob. XLII.

[Illustration]

    _Invenire vim qua corpusculum in centro Sphæræ locatum ad ejus
    segmentum quodcunq; attrahitur._

Sit P corpus in centro Sphæræ, & RBSD segmentum ejus plano RDS & superficie
Sphærica RBS contentum. Superficie Sphærica EFG centro P descripta secetur
DB in F, ac distinguatur segmentum in partes BREFGS, FEDG. Sit autem
superficies illa non pure Mathematica, sed Physica, profunditatem habens
quam minimam. Nominetur ista profunditas O, & erit hæc superficies (per
demonstrata Archimedis) ut PF × DF × O. Ponamus præterea vires attractivas
particularum Sphæræ esse reciproce ut distantiarum dignitas illa cujus
Index est n; & vis qua superficies FE trahit corpus P erit ut DF × O ÷
PF^{n - 1}. Huic proportionale sit perpendiculum FN ductum in O; & area
curvilinea BDLIB, quam ordinatim applicata FN in longitudinem DB per motum
continuum ducta describit, erit ut vis tota qua segmentum totum RBSD trahit
corpus P.   Q. E. I.

Prop. LXXXIV. Prob. XLIII.

    _Invenire vim qua corpusculum, extra centrum Sphæræ in axe segmenti
    cujusvis locatum, attrahitur ab eodem segmento._

A segmento EBK trahatur corpus P (_Vide Fig. Prop. 79. 80. 81._) in ejus
axe ADB locatum. Centro P intervallo PE describatur superficies Sphærica
EFK, qua distinguatur segmentum in partes duas EBKF & EFKD. Quæratur vis
partis prioris per Prop. LXXXI. & vis partis posterioris per Prop.
LXXXIII.; & summa virium erit vis segmenti totius EBKD.   Q. E. I.

_Scholium._

Explicatis attractionibus corporum Sphæricorum, jam pergere liceret ad
leges attractionum aliorum quorundam ex particulis attractivis similiter
constantium corporum; sed ista particulatim tractare minus ad institutum
spectat. Suffecerit Propositiones quasdam generaliores de viribus hujusmodi
corporum, deq; motibus inde oriundis, ob eorum in rebus Philosophicis
aliqualem usum, subjungere.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. XIII.

_De Corporum etiam non Sphæricorum viribus attractivis._

Prop. LXXXV. Theor. XLII.

    _Si corporis attracti, ubi attrahenti contiguum est, attractio longe
    fortior sit, quam cum vel minimo intervallo separantur ab invicem:
    vires particularum trahentis, in recessu corporis attracti, decrescunt
    in ratione plusquam duplicata distantiarum a particulis._

Nam si vires decrescunt in ratione duplicata distantiarum a particulis;
attractio versus corpus Sphæricum, propterea quod (per Prop. LXXIV.) sit
reciproce ut quadratum distantiæ attracti corporis a centro Sphæræ, haud
sensibiliter augebitur ex contactu; atq; adhuc minus augebitur ex contactu,
si attractio in recessu corporis attracti decrescat in ratione minore.
Patet igitur Propositio de Sphæris attractivis. Et par est ratio Orbium
Sphæricorum concavorum corpora externa trahentium. Et multo magis res
constat in Orbibus corpora interius constituta trahentibus, cum
attractiones passim per Orbium cavitates ab attractionibus contrariis (per
Prop. LXX.) tollantur, ideoq; vel in ipso contactu nullæ sunt. Quod si
Sphæris hisce Orbibusq; Sphæricis partes quælibet a loco contactus remotæ
auferantur, & partes novæ ubivis addantur: mutari possunt figuræ horum
corporum attractivorum pro lubitu, nec tamen partes additæ vel subductæ,
cum sint a loco contactus remotæ, augebunt notabiliter attractionis
excessum qui ex contactu oritur. Constat igitur Propositio de corporibus
figurarum omnium.   Q. E. D.

Prop. LXXXVI. Theor. XLIII.

    _Si particularum, ex quibus corpus attractivum componitur, vires in
    recessu corporis attracti decrescunt in triplicata vel plusquam
    triplicata ratione distantiarum a particulis: attractio longe fortior
    erit in contactu, quam cum attrahens & attractum intervallo vel minimo
    separantur ab invicem._

Nam attractionem in accessu attracti corpusculi ad hujusmodi Sphæram
trahentem augeri in infinitum, constat per solutionem Problematis XLI. in
Exemplo secundo ac tertio exhibitam. Idem, per Exempla illa & Theorema XLI
inter se collata, facile colligitur de attractionibus corporum versus Orbes
concavo-convexos, sive corpora attracta collocentur extra Orbes, sive intra
in eorum cavitatibus. Sed & addendo vel auferendo his Sphæris & Orbibus
ubivis extra locum contactus materiam quamlibet attractivam, eo ut corpora
attractiva induant figuram quamvis assignatam, constabit Propositio de
corporibus universis.   Q. E. D.

Prop. LXXXVII. Theor. XLIV.

    _Si corpora duo sibi invicem similia & ex materia æqualiter attractiva
    constantia seorsim attrahant corpuscula sibi ipsis proportionalia & ad
    se similiter posita: attractiones acceleratrices corpusculorum in
    corpora tota erunt ut attractiones acceleratrices corpusculorum in
    eorum particulas totis proportionales & in totis similiter positas._

Nam si corpora distinguantur in particulas, quæ sint totis proportionales &
in totis similiter sitæ; erit, ut attractio in particulam quamlibet unius
corporis ad attractionem in particulam correspondentem in corpore altero,
ita attractiones in particulas singulas primi corporis ad attractiones in
alterius particulas singulas correspondentes; & componendo, ita attractio
in totum primum corpus ad attractionem in totum secundum.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Ergo si vires attractivæ particularum, augendo distantias
corpusculorum attractorum, decrescant in ratione dignitatis cujusvis
distantiarum: attractiones acceleratrices in corpora tota erunt ut corpora
directe & distantiarum dignitates illæ inverse. Ut si vires particularum
decrescant in ratione duplicata distantiarum a corpusculis attractis,
corpora autem sint ut A cub. & B cub. adeoq; tum corporum latera cubica,
tum corpusculorum attractorum distantiæ a corporibus, ut A & B:
attractiones acceleratrices in corpora erunt ut A cub. ÷ A quad. & B cub. ÷
B quad. id est, ut corporum latera illa cubica A & B. Si vires particularum
decrescant in ratione triplicata distantiarum a corpusculis attractis;
attractiones acceleratrices in corpora tota erunt ut A cub. ÷ A cub. & B
cub. ÷ B cub. id est, æquales. Si vires decrescant in ratione
quadruplicata, attractiones in corpora erunt ut A cub. ÷ Aqq. & B cub. ÷
Bqq. id est, reciproce ut latera cubica A & B. Et sic in cæteris.

_Corol. 2._ Unde vicissim, ex viribus quibus corpora similia trahunt
corpuscula ad se similiter posita, colligi potest ratio decrementi virium
particularum attractivarum in recessu corpusculi attracti; si modo
decrementum illud sit directe vel inverse in ratione aliqua distantiarum.

Prop. LXXXVIII. Theor. XLV.

    _Si particularum æqualium corporis cujuscunq; vires attractivæ sint ut
    distantiæ locorum a particulis: vis corporis totius tendet ad ipsius
    centrum gravitatis; & eadem erit cum vi globi ex materia consimili &
    æquali constantis & centrum habentis in ejus centro gravitatis._

[Illustration]

Corporis RSTV particulæ A, B trahant corpusculum aliquod Z viribus quæ, si
particulæ æquantur inter se, sint ut distantiæ AZ, BZ; sin particulæ
statuantur inæquales, sint ut hæ particulæ in distantias suas AZ, BZ
respective ductæ. Et exponantur hæ vires per contenta illa A × AZ & B × BZ.
Jungatur AB, & secetur ea in G ut sit AG ad BG ut particula B ad particulam
A; & erit G commune centrum gravitatis particularum A & B. Vis A × AZ per
Legum Corol. 2. resolvitur in vires A × GZ & A × AG, & vis B × BZ in vires
B × GZ & B × BG. Vires autem A × AG & B × BG, ob proportionales A ad B & BG
ad AG, æquantur, adeoq;, cum dirigantur in partes contrarias, se mutuo
destruunt. Restant vires A × GZ & B × GZ. Tendunt hæ ab Z versus centrum G,
& vim A + B × GZ componunt; hoc est, vim eandem ac si particulæ attractivæ
A & B consisterent in eorum communi gravitatis centro G, globum ibi
componentes.

Eodem argumento si adjungatur particula tertia C; & componatur hujus vis
cum vi A + B × GZ tendente ad centrum G, vis inde oriunda tendet ad commune
centrum gravitatis globi illius G & particulæ C; hoc est, ad commune
centrum gravitatis trium particularum A, B, C; & eadem erit ac si globus &
particula C consisterent in centro illo communi, globum majorem ibi
componentes. Et sic pergitur in infinitum. Eadem est igitur vis tota
particularum omnium corporis cujuscunq; RSTV ac si corpus illud, servato
gravitatis centro, figuram globi indueret.   Q. E. D.

_Corol._ Hinc motus corporis attracti Z idem erit ac si corpus attrahens
RSTV esset Sphæricum: & propterea si corpus illud attrahens vel quiescat,
vel progrediatur uniformiter in directum, corpus attractum movebitur in
Ellipsi centrum habente in attrahentis centro gravitatis.

Prop. LXXXIX. Theor. XLVI.

    _Si Corpora sint plura ex particulis æqualibus constantia, quarum vires
    sunt ut distantiæ locorum a singulis: vis ex omnium viribus composita,
    qua corpusculum quodcunq; trahitur, tendet ad trahentium commune
    centrum gravitatis, & eadem erit ac si trahentia illa, servato
    gravitatis centro communi, coirent & in globum formarentur._

Demonstratur eodem modo, atq; Propositio superior.

_Corol._ Ergo motus corporis attracti idem erit ac si corpora trahentia,
servato communi gravitatis centro, coirent & in globum formarentur. Ideoq;
si corporum trahentium commune gravitatis centrum vel quiescit, vel
progreditur uniformiter in linea recta, corpus attractum movebitur in
Ellipsi, centrum habente in communi illo trahentium centro gravitatis.

Prop. XC. Prob. XLIV.

    _Si ad singula circuli cujuscunq; puncta tendant vires centripetæ
    decrescentes in quacunq; distantiarum ratione: invenire vim qua
    corpusculum attrahitur ubivis in recta quæ ad planum circuli per
    centrum ejus perpendicularis consistit._

[Illustration]

Centro A intervallo quovis AD, in plano cui recta AP perpendicularis est,
describi intelligatur circulus; & invenienda sit vis qua corpus quodvis P
in eundem attrahitur. A circuli puncto quovis E ad corpus attractum P
agatur recta PE: In recta PA capiatur PF ipsi PE æqualis, & erigatur
Normalis FK, quæ sit ut vis qua punctum E trahit corpusculum P. Sitq; IKL
curva linea quam punctum K perpetuo tangit. Occurrat eadem circuli plano in
L. In PA capiatur PH æqualis PD, & erigatur perpendiculum HI curvæ prædictæ
occurrens in I; & erit corpusculi P attractio in circulum ut area AHIL
ducta in altitudinem AP.   Q. E. I.

Etenim in AE capiatur linea quam minima Ee. Jungatur Pe, & in PA capiatur
Pf ipsi Pe æqualis. Et quoniam vis, qua annuli punctum quodvis E trahit ad
se corpus P, ponitur esse ut FK, & inde vis qua punctum illud trahit corpus
P versus A est ut AP × FK ÷ PE, & vis qua annulus totus trahit corpus P
versus A, ut annulus & AP × FK ÷ PE conjunctim; annulus autem iste est ut
rectangulum sub radio AE & latitudine Ee, & hoc rectangulum (ob
proportionales PE & AE, Ee & cE) æquatur rectangulo PE × cE seu PE × Ff;
erit vis qua annulus iste trahit corpus P versus A ut PE × Ff & AP × FK ÷
PE conjunctim, id est, ut contentum Ff × AP × FK, sive ut area FKkf ducta
in AP. Et propterea summa virium, quibus annuli omnes in circulo, qui
centro A & intervallo AD describitur, trahunt corpus P versus A, est ut
area tota AHIKL ducta in AP.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si vires punctorum decrescunt in duplicata distantiarum
ratione, hoc est, si sit FK ut 1 ÷ PF quad., atq; adeo area AHIKL ut {1 ÷
PA} - {1 ÷ PH}; erit attractio corpusculi P in circulum 1 - {PA ÷ PH}, id
est, ut AH ÷ PH.

_Corol. 2._ Et universaliter, si vires punctorum ad distantias D sint
reciproce ut distantiarum dignitas quælibet D^n, hoc est, si sit FK ut 1 ÷
D^n, adeoq; area AHIKL ut {1 ÷ PA^{n - 1}} - {1 ÷ PH^{n - 1}}; erit
attractio corpusculi P in circulum ut {1 ÷ PA^{n - 2}} - {PA ÷ PH^{n - 1}}.

_Corol. 3._ Et si diameter circuli augeatur in infinitum, & numerus n sit
unitate major; attractio corpusculi P in planum totum infinitum erit
reciproce ut PA^{n - 2}, propterea quod terminus alter PA ÷ PH^{n - 1}
evanescet.

Prop. XCI. Prob. XLV.

    _Invenire attractionem corpusculi siti in axe solidi, ad cujus puncta
    singula tendunt vires centripetæ in quacunq; distantiarum ratione
    decrescentes._

[Illustration]

In solidum ADEFG trahatur corpusculum P, situm in ejus axe AB. Circulo
quolibet RFS ad hunc axem perpendiculari secetur hoc solidum, & in ejus
diametro FS, in plano aliquo PALKB per axem transeunte, capiatur (per Prop.
XC.) longitudo FK vi qua corpusculum P in circulum illum attrahitur
proportionalis. Tangat autem punctum K curvam lineam LKI, planis extimorum
circulorum AL & BI occurrentem in A & B; & erit attractio corpusculi P in
solidum ut area LABI.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Unde si solidum Cylindrus sit, parallelogrammo ADEB circa axem
AB revoluto descriptus, & vires centripetæ in singula ejus puncta tendentes
sint reciproce ut quadrata distantiarum a punctis: erit attractio
corpusculi P in hunc Cylindrum ut BA - PE + PD. Nam ordinatim applicata FK
(per Corol. 1. Prop. XC.) erit ut 1 - PF ÷ PR. Hujus pars 1 ducta in
longitudinem AB, describit aream 1 × AB; & pars altera PF ÷ PR ducta in
longitudinem PB, describit aream 1 in {PE - AD} (id quod ex curvæ LKI
quadratura facile ostendi potest:) & similiter pars eadem ducta in
longitudinem PA describit aream 1 in PD - AD, ductaq; in ipsarum PB, PA
differentiam AB describit arearum differentiam 1 in {PE - PD}. De contento
primo 1 × AB auferatur contentum postremum 1 in PE - PD, & restabit area
LABI æqualis 1 in AB - PE + PD. Ergo vis huic areæ proportionalis est ut AB
- PE + PD.

[Illustration]

_Corol. 2._ Hinc etiam vis innotescit qua Sphærois AGBCD attrahit corpus
quodvis P, exterius in axe suo AB situm. Sit NKRM Sectio Conica cujus
ordinatim applicata ER, ipsi PE perpendicularis, æquetur semper longitudini
PD, quæ ducitur ad punctum illud D, in quo applicata ista Sphæroidem secat.
A Sphæroidis verticibus A, B ad ejus axem AB erigantur perpendicula AK, BM
ipsis AP, BP æqualia respective, & propterea Sectioni Conicæ occurrentia in
K & M; & jungantur KM auferens ab eadem segmentum KMRK. Sit autem
Sphæroidis centrum S & semidiameter maxima SC: & vis qua Sphærois trahit
corpus P erit ad vim qua Sphæra, diametro AB descripta, trahit idem corpus,
ut

  AS × CSq. - PS × KMRK     AS cub.
  --------------------- ad ---------.
   PSq. + CSq. - ASq.      3PS quad.

Et eodem computando fundamento invenire licet vires segmentorum Sphæroidis.

[Illustration]

_Corol. 3._ Quod si corpusculum intra Sphæroidem in data quavis ejusdem
diametro collocetur; attractio erit ut ipsius distantia a centro. Id quod
facilius colligetur hoc argumento. Sit AGOF Sphærois attrahens, S centrum
ejus & P corpus attractum. Per corpus illud P agantur tum semidiameter SPA,
tum rectæ duæ quævis DE, FG Sphæroidi hinc inde occurrentes in D & E, F &
G: Sintq; PCM, HLN superficies Sphæroidum duarum interiorum, exteriori
similium & concentricarum, quarum prior transeat per corpus P & secet
rectas DE & FG in B & C, posterior secet easdem rectas in H, I & K, L.
Habeant autem Sphæroides omnes axem communem, & erunt rectarum partes hinc
inde interceptæ DP & BE, FP & CG, DH & IE, FK & LG sibi mutuo æquales;
propterea quod rectæ DE, PB & HI bisecantur in eodem puncto, ut & rectæ FG,
PC & KL. Concipe jam DPF, EPG designare Conos oppositos, angulis
verticalibus DPF, EPG infinite parvis descriptos, & lineas etiam DH, EI
infinite parvas esse; & Conorum particulæ Sphæroidum superficiebus abscissæ
DHKF, GLIE, ob æqualitatem linearum DH, EI, erunt ad invicem ut quadrata
distantiarum suarum a corpusculo P, & propterea corpusculum illud æqualiter
trahent. Et pari ratione, si superficiebus Sphæroidum innumerarum similium
concentricarum & axem communem habentium dividantur spatia DPF, EGCB in
particulas, hæ omnes utrinq; æqualiter trahent corpus P in partes
contrarias. Æquales igitur sunt vires coni DPF & segmenti Conici EGCB, &
per contrarietatem se mutuo destruunt. Et par est ratio virium materiæ
omnis extra Sphæroidem intimam PCBM. Trahitur igitur corpus P a sola
Sphæroide intima PCBM, & propterea (per Corol. 3. Prop. LXXII.) attractio
ejus est ad vim, qua corpus A trahitur a Sphæroide tota AGOD, ut distantia
PS ad distantiam AS.   Q. E. I.

Prop. XCII. Prob. XLVI.

    _Dato corpore attractivo, invenire rationem decrementi virium
    centripetarum in ejus puncta singula tendentium._

E corpore dato formanda est Sphæra vel Cylindrus aliave figura regularis,
cujus lex attractionis, cuivis decrementi rationi congruens (per Prop.
LXXX. LXXXI. & XCI.) inveniri potest. Dein factis experimentis invenienda
est vis attractionis in diversis distantiis, & lex attractionis in totum
inde patefacta dabit rationem decrementi virium partium singularum, quam
invenire oportuit.

Prop. XCIII. Theor. XLVII.

    _Si solidum ex una parte planum, ex reliquis autem partibus infinitum,
    constet ex particulis æqualibus æqualiter attractivis, quarum vires in
    recessu a solido decrescunt in ratione potestatis cujusvis distantiarum
    plusquam quadraticæ, & vi solidi totius corpusculum ad utramvis plani
    partem constitutum trahatur: dico quod solidi vis illa attractiva, in
    recessu ab ejus superficie plana, decrescet in ratione potestatis,
    cujus latus est distantia corpusculi a plano, & Index ternario minor
    quam Index potestatis distantiarum._

[Illustration]

_Cas. 1._ Sit LGl planum quo Solidum terminatur. Jaceat autem solidum ex
parte plani hujus versus I, inq; plana innumera mHM, nIN &c. ipsi GL
parallela resolvatur. Et primo collocetur corpus attractum C extra solidum.
Agatur autem CGHI planis illis innumeris perpendicularis, & decrescant
vires attractivæ punctorum solidi in ratione potestatis distantiarum, cujus
index sit numerus n ternario non minor. Ergo (per Corol. 3. Prop. XC) vis
qua planum quodvis mHM trahit punctum C est reciproce ut CH^{n - 2}. In
plano mHM capiatur longitudo HM ipsi CH^{n - 2} reciproce proportionalis, &
erit vis illa ut HM. Similiter in planis singulis lGL, nIN, oKO &c.
capiantur longitudines GL, IN, KO &c. ipsis CG^{n - 2}, CI^{n - 2}, CK^{n -
2} &c. reciproce proportionales; & vires planorum eorundem erunt ut
longitudines captæ, adeoq; summa virium ut summa longitudinum, hoc est, vis
solidi totius ut area GLOK in infinitum versus OK producta. Sed area illa
per notas quadraturarum methodos est reciproce ut CG^{n - 3}, & propterea
vis solidi totius est reciproce ut CG^{n - 3} Q. E. D.

_Cas. 2._ Collocetur jam corpusculum C ex parte plani lGL intra solidum, &
capiatur distantia CK æqualis distantiæ CG. Et solidi pars LGloKO, planis
parallelis lGL, oKO terminata, corpusculum C in medio situm nullam in
partem trahet, contrariis oppositorum punctorum actionibus se mutuo per
æqualitatem tollentibus. Proinde corpusculum C sola vi solidi ultra planum
OK siti trahitur. Hæc autem vis (per Casum primum) est reciproce ut CK^{n -
3}, hoc est (ob æquales CG, CK) reciproce ut CG^{n - 3}.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si solidum LGIN planis duobus infinitis parallelis LG, IN
utrinq; terminetur; innotescit ejus vis attractiva, subducendo de vi
attractiva solidi totius infiniti LGKO vim attractivam partis ulterioris
NIKO, in infinitum versus KO productæ.

_Corol. 2._ Si solidi hujus infiniti pars ulterior, quando attractio ejus
collata cum attractione partis citerioris nullius pene est momenti,
rejiciatur: attractio partis illius citerioris augendo distantiam decrescet
quam proxime in ratione potestatis CG^{n - 3}.

_Corol. 3._ Et hinc si corpus quodvis finitum & ex una parte planum trahat
corpusculum e regione medii illius plani, & distantia inter corpusculum &
planum collata cum dimensionibus corporis attrahentis perexigua sit,
constet autem corpus attrahens ex particulis homogeneis, quarum vires
attractivæ decrescunt in ratione potestatis cujusvis plusquam quadruplicatæ
distantiarum; vis attractiva corporis totius decrescet quamproxime in
ratione potestatis, cujus latus sit distantia illa perexigua, & Index
ternario minor quam Index potestatis prioris. De corpore ex particulis
constante, quarum vires attractivæ decrescunt in ratione potestatis
triplicatæ distantiarum, assertio non valet, propterea quod, in hoc casu,
attractio partis illius ulterioris corporis infiniti in Corollario secundo,
semper est infinite major quam attractio partis citerioris.

_Scholium._

Si corpus aliquod perpendiculariter versus planum datum trahatur, & ex data
lege attractionis quæratur motus corporis: Solvetur Problema quærendo (per
Prop. XXVII.) motum corporis recta descendentis ad hoc planum, & (per Legum
Corol. 2.) componendo motum istum cum uniformi motu, secundum lineas eidem
plano parallelas facto. Et contra, si quæratur Lex attractionis in planum
secundum lineas perpendiculares factæ ea conditione ut corpus attractum in
data quacunq; curva linea moveatur, solvetur Problema operando ad exemplum
Problematis tertii.

Operationes autem contrahi solent resolvendo ordinatim applicatas in series
convergentes. Ut si ad basem A in angulo quovis dato ordinatim applicetur
longitudo B, quæ sit ut basis dignitas quælibet A^{m÷n}; & quæratur vis qua
corpus, secundum positionem ordinatim applicatæ, vel in basem attractum vel
a basi fugatum, moveri possit in curva linea quam ordinatim applicata
termino suo superiore semper attingit; Suppono basem augeri parte quam
minima O, & ordinatim applicatam {A + O}^{m÷n} resolvo in Seriem infinitam

  A^{m÷n} + m ÷ n OA^{{m - n}÷n} + {mm - mn} ÷ 2nn O^2 A^{{m - 2n}÷n} &c.

atq; hujus termino in quo O duarum est dimensionum, id est termino {mm -
mn} ÷ 2nn O^2 A^{(m - 2n)÷n} vim proportionalem esse suppono. Est igitur
vis quæsita ut {mm - mn} ÷ nn A^{(m - 2n)÷n}, vel quod perinde est, ut {mm
- mn} ÷ nn B^{(m - 2n)÷m}. Ut si ordinatim applicata Parabolam attingat,
existente m = 2, & n = 1: fiet vis ut data 2B^0, adeoq; dabitur. Data
igitur vi corpus movebitur in Parabola, quemadmodum _Galilæus_
demonstravit. Quod si ordinatim applicata Hyperbolam attingat, existente m
= 0 - 1, & n = 1; fiet vis ut 2B^3: adeoq; vi, quæ sit ut cubus ordinatim
applicatæ, corpus movebitur in Hyperbola. Sed missis hujusmodi
Propositionibus, pergo ad alias quasdam de motu, quas nondum attigi.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. XIV.

_De motu corporum minimorum, quæ viribus centripetis ad singulas magni
alicujus corporis partes tendentibus agitantur._

Prop. XCIV. Theor. XLVIII.

[Illustration]

    _Si media duo similaria, spatio planis parallelis utrinq; terminato,
    distinguantur ab invicem, & corpus in transitu per hoc spatium
    attrahatur vel impellatur perpendiculariter versus medium alterutrum,
    neq; ulla alia vi agitetur vel impediatur; Sit autem attractio, in
    æqualibus ab utroq; plano distantiis ad eandem ipsius partem captis,
    ubiq; eadem: dico quod sinus incidentiæ in planum alterutrum erit ad
    sinum emergentiæ ex plano altero in ratione data._

_Cas. 1._ Sunto Aa, Bb plana duo parallela. Incidat corpus in planum prius
Aa secundam lineam GH, ac toto suo per spatium intermedium transitu
attrahatur vel impellatur versus medium incidentiæ, eaq; actione describat
lineam curvam HI, & emergat secundum lineam IK. Ad planum emergentiæ Bb
erigatur perpendiculum IM, occurrens tum lineæ incidentiæ GH productæ in M,
tum plano incidentiæ Aa in R; & linea emergentiæ KI producta occurrat HM in
L. Centro L intervallo LI describatur circulus, secans tam HM in P & Q,
quam MI productam in N; & primo si attractio vel impulsus ponatur
uniformis, erit (ex demonstratis _Galilæi_) curva HI Parabola, cujus hæc
est proprietas, ut rectangulum sub dato latere recto & linea IM æquale sit
HM quadrato; sed & linea HM bisecabitur in L. Unde si ad MI demittatur
perpendiculum LO, æquales erunt MO, OR; & additis æqualibus IO, ON, fient
totæ æquales MN, IR. Proinde cum IR detur, datur etiam MN, estq;
rectangulum NMI ad rectangulum sub latere recto & IM, hoc est, ad HMq., in
data ratione. Sed rectangulum NMI æquale est rectangulo PMQ, id est,
differentiæ quadratorum MLq. & PLq. seu LIq.; & HMq. datam rationem habet
ad sui ipsius quartam partem LMq.: ergo datur ratio MLq. - LIq. ad MLq., &
divisim, ratio LIq. ad MLq., & ratio dimidiata LI ad ML. Sed in omni
triangulo LMI, sinus angulorum sunt proportionales lateribus oppositis.
Ergo datur ratio sinus anguli incidentiæ LMR ad sinum anguli emergentiæ
LIR.   Q. E. D.

[Illustration]

_Cas. 2._ Transeat jam corpus successive per spatia plura parallelis planis
terminata, AabB, BbcC &c. & agitetur vi quæ sit in singulis separatim
uniformis, at in diversis diversa; & per jam demonstrata, sinus incidentiæ
in planum primum Aa erit ad sinum emergentiæ ex plano secundo Bb, in data
ratione; & hic sinus, qui est sinus incidentiæ in planum secundum Bb, erit
ad sinum emergentiæ ex plano tertio Cc, in data ratione; & hic sinus ad
sinum emergentiæ ex plano quarto Dd, in data ratione; & sic in infinitum: &
ex æquo sinus incidentiæ in planum primum ad sinum emergentiæ ex plano
ultimo in data ratione. Minuatur jam planorum intervalla & augeatur numerus
in infinitum, eo ut attractionis vel impulsus actio secundum legem
quamcunq; assignatam continua reddatur; & ratio sinus incidentiæ in planum
primum ad sinum emergentiæ ex plano ultimo, semper data existens, etiamnum
dabitur.   Q. E. D.

Prop. XCV. Theor. XLIX.

    _Iisdem positis; dico quod velocitas corporis ante incidentiam est ad
    ejus velocitatem post emergentiam, ut sinus emergentiæ ad sinum
    incidentiæ._

Capiantur AH, Id æquales, & erigantur perpendicula AG, dK occurrentia
lineis incidentiæ & emergentiæ GH, IK, in G & K. In GH capiatur TH æqualis
IK, & ad planum Aa demittatur normaliter Tv. Et per Legum Corol. 2.
distinguatur motus corporis in duos, unum planis Aa, Bb, Cc &c.
perpendicularem, alterum iisdem parallelum. Vis attractionis vel impulsus
agendo secundum lineas perpendiculares nil mutat motum secundum parallelas,
& propterea corpus hoc motu conficiet æqualibus temporibus æqualia illa
secundum parallelas intervalla, quæ sunt inter lineam AG & punctum H,
interq; punctum I & lineam dK; hoc est, æqualibus temporibus describet
lineas GH, IK. Proinde velocitas ante incidentiam est ad velocitatem post
emergentiam, ut GH ad IK vel TH, id est, ut AH vel Id ad vH, hoc est
(respectu radii TH vel IK) ut sinus emergentiæ ad sinum incidentiæ.
Q. E. D.

Prop. XCVI. Theor. L.

    _Iisdem positis & quod motus ante incidentiam velocior sit quam postea:
    dico quod corpus, inclinando lineam incidentiæ, reflectetur tandem, &
    angulus reflexionis fiet æqualis angulo incidentiæ._

[Illustration]

Nam concipe corpus inter plana parallela Aa, Bb, Cc &c. describere arcus
Parabolicos, ut supra; sintq; arcus illi HP, PQ, QR, &c. Et sit ea lineæ
incidentiæ GH obliquitas ad planum primum Aa, ut sinus incidentiæ sit ad
radium circuli, cujus est sinus, in ea ratione quam habet idem sinus
incidentiæ ad sinum emergentiæ ex plano Dd, in spatium DdeE: & ob sinum
emergentiæ jam factum æqualem radio, angulus emergentiæ erit rectus, adeoq;
linea emergentiæ coincidet cum plano Dd. Perveniat corpus ad hoc planum in
puncto R; & quoniam linea emergentiæ coincidit cum eodem plano, perspicuum
est quod corpus non potest ultra pergere versus planum Ee. Sed nec potest
idem pergere in linea emergentiæ Rd, propterea quod perpetuo attrahitur vel
impellitur versus medium incidentiæ. Revertetur itaq; inter plana Cc, Dd
describendo arcum Parabolæ QRq, cujus vertex principalis (juxta demonstrata
_Galilæi_) est in R; secabit planum Cc in eodem angulo in q, ac prius in Q;
dein pergendo in arcubus parabolicis qp, ph &c. arcubus prioribus QP, PH
similibus & æqualibus, secabit reliqua plana in iisdem angulis in p, h &c.
ac prius in P, H &c. emergetq; tandem eadem obliquitate in h, qua incidit
in H. Concipe jam planorum Aa, Bb, Cc, Dd, Ee intervalla in infinitum minui
& numerum augeri, eo ut actio attractionis vel impulsus secundum legem
quamcunq; assignatam continua reddatur; & angulus emergentiæ semper angulo
incidentiæ æqualis existens, eidem etiamnum manebit æqualis.   Q. E. D.

_Scholium._

[Illustration]

Harum attractionum haud multum dissimiles sunt Lucis reflexiones &
refractiones, factæ secundum datam Secantium rationem, ut invenit
_Snellius_, & per consequens secundum datam Sinuum rationem, ut exposuit
_Cartesius_. Namq; Lucem successive propagari & spatio quasi decem
minutorum primorum a Sole ad Terram venire, jam constat per Phænomena
Satellitum _Jovis_, Observationibus diversorum Astronomorum confirmata.
Radii autem in aere existentes (uti dudum _Grimaldus_, luce per foramen in
tenebrosum cubiculum admissa, invenit, & ipse quoq; expertus sum) in
transitu suo prope corporum vel opacorum vel perspicuorum angulos (quales
sunt nummorum ex auro, argento & ære cusorum termini rectanguli circulares,
& cultrorum, lapidum aut fractorum vitrorum acies) incurvantur circum
corpora, quasi attracti in eadem; & ex his radiis, qui in transitu illo
propius accedunt ad corpora incurvantur magis, quasi magis attracti, ut
ipse etiam diligenter observavi. In figura designat s aciem cultri vel
cunei cujusvis AsB; & gowog, fnvnf, emtme, dlsld sunt radii, arcubus owo,
nvn, mtm, lsl versus cultrum incurvati; idq; magis vel minus pro distantia
eorum a cultro. Cum autem talis incurvatio radiorum fiat in aere extra
cultrum, debebunt etiam radii, qui incidunt in cultrum, prius incurvari in
aere quam cultrum attingunt. Et par est ratio incidentium in vitrum. Fit
igitur refractio, non in puncto incidentiæ, sed paulatim per continuam
incurvationem radiorum, factam partim in aere antequam attingunt vitrum,
partim (ni fallor) in vitro, postquam illud ingressi sunt: uti in radiis
ckzkc, biyib, ahxha incidentibus ad r, q, p, & inter k & z, i & y, h & x
incurvatis, delineatum est. Igitur ob analogiam quæ est inter propagationem
radiorum lucis & progressum corporum, visum est Propositiones sequentes in
usus opticos subjungere; interea de natura radiorum (utrum sint corpora
necne) nihil omnino disputans, sed trajectorias corporum trajectoriis
radiorum persimiles solummodo determinans.

Prop. XCVII. Prob. XLVII.

    _Posito quod sinus incidentiæ in superficiem aliquam sit ad sinum
    emergentiæ in data ratione, quodq; incurvatio viæ corporum juxta
    superficiem illam fiat in spatio brevissimo, quod ut punctum
    considerari possit; determinare superficiem quæ corpuscula omnia de
    loco dato successive manantia convergere faciat ad alium locum datum._

[Illustration]

Sit A locus a quo corpuscula divergunt; B locus in quem convergere debent;
CDE curva linea quæ circa axem AB revoluta describat superficiem quæsitam;
D, E curvæ illius puncta duo quævis; & EF, EG perpendicula in corporis vias
AD, DB demissa. Accedat punctum D ad punctum E; & lineæ DF qua AD augetur,
ad lineam DG qua DB diminuitur, ratio ultima erit eadem quæ sinus
incidentiæ ad sinum emergentiæ. Datur ergo ratio incrementi lineæ AD ad
decrementum lineæ DB; & propterea si in axe AB sumatur ubivis punctum C,
per quod curva CDE transire debet, & capiatur ipsius AC incrementum CM, ad
ipsius BC decrementum CN in data ratione; centrisq; A, B, & intervallis AM,
BN describantur circuli duo se mutuo secantes in D: punctum illud D tanget
curvam quæsitam CDE, eandemq; ubivis tangendo determinabit.   Q. E. I.

_Corol. 1._ Faciendo autem ut punctum A vel B nunc abeat in infinitum, nunc
migret ad alteras partes puncti C, habebuntur figuræ illæ omnes quas
_Cartesius_ in Optica & Geometria ad refractiones exposuit. Quarum
inventionem cum _Cartesius_ maximi fecerit & studiose celaverit, visum fuit
hic propositione exponere.

[Illustration]

_Corol. 2._ Si corpus in superficiem quamvis CD, secundum lineam rectam AD
lege quavis ductam incidens, emergat secundum aliam quamvis rectam DK, & a
puncto C duci intelligantur lineæ curvæ CP, CQ ipsis AD, DK semper
perpendiculares: erunt incrementa linearum PD, QD, atq; adeo lineæ ipsæ PD,
QD, incrementis istis genitæ, ut sinus incidentiæ & emergentiæ ad invicem:
& contra.

Prop. XCVIII. Prob. XLVIII.

    _Iisdem positis, & circa axem AB descripta superficie quacunq;
    attractiva CD, regulari vel irregulari, per quam corpora de loco dato A
    exeuntia transire debent: invenire superficiem secundam attractivam EF,
    quæ corpora illa ad locum datum B convergere faciat._

Juncta AB secet superficiem primam in C & secundam in E, puncto D utcunq;
assumpto. Et posito sinu incidentiæ in superficiem primam ad sinum
emergentiæ ex eadem, & sinu emergentiæ e superficie secunda ad sinum
incidentiæ in eandem, ut quantitas aliqua data M ad aliam datam N; produc
tum AB ad G ut sit BG ad CE ut M - N ad N, tum AD ad H ut sit AH æqualis
AG, tum etiam DF ad K ut sit DK ad DH ut N ad M. Junge KB, & centro D
intervallo DH describe circulum occurrentem KB productæ in L, ipsiq; DL
parallelam age BF: & punctum F tanget lineam EF, quæ circa axem AB revoluta
describet superficiem quæsitam.   Q. E. F.

Nam concipe lineas CP, CQ ipsis AD, DF respective, & lineas ER, ES ipsis
FB, FD ubiq; perpendiculares esse, adeoq; QS ipsi CE semper æqualem; & erit
(per Corol. 2. Prop. XCVII.) PD ad QD ut M ad N, adeoq; ut DL ad DK vel FB
ad FK; & divisim ut DL - FB seu PH - PD - FB ad FD seu FQ - QD; & composite
ut HP - FB ad FQ, id est (ob æquales HP & CG, QS & CE) CE + BG - FR ad CE -
FS. Verum (ob proportionales BG ad CE & M - N ad N) est etiam CE + BG ad CE
ut M ad N: adeoq; divisim FR ad FS ut M ad N, & propterea per Corol. 2.
Prop. XCVII. superficies EF cogit corpus in se secundum lineam DF incidens
pergere in linea FR, ad locum B.   Q. E. D.

_Scholium._

Eadem methodo pergere liceret ad superficies tres vel plures. Ad usus autem
Opticos maxime accommodatæ sunt figuræ Sphæricæ. Si Perspicillorum vitra
Objectiva ex vitris duobus Sphærice figuratis & Aquam inter se claudentibus
conflentur, fieri potest ut a refractionibus aquæ errores refractionum, quæ
fiunt in vitrorum superficiebus extremis, satis accurate corrigantur. Talia
autem vitra Objectiva vitris Ellipticis & Hyperbolicis præferenda sunt, non
solum quod facilius & accuratius formari possint, sed etiam quod penicillos
radiorum extra axem vitri sitos accuratius refringant. Verum tamen diversa
diversorum radiorum refrangibilitas impedimento est, quo minus Optica per
figuras vel Sphæricas vel alias quascunq; perfici possit. Nisi corrigi
possint errores illinc oriundi, labor omnis in cæteris corrigendis imperite
collocabitur.

       *       *       *       *       *


DE MOTU CORPORUM

       *       *       *       *       *

Liber SECUNDUS

       *       *       *       *       *

SECT. I.

_De Motu corporum quibus resistitur in ratione velocitatis._

Prop. I. Theor. I.

    _Corporis, cui resistitur in ratione velocitatis, motus ex resistentia
    amissus est ut spatium movendo confectum._

Nam cum motus singulis temporis particulis amissus sit ut velocitas, hoc
est ut itineris confecti particula: erit componendo motus toto tempore
amissus ut iter totum.   Q. E. D.

_Corol._ Igitur si corpus gravitate omni destitutum in spatiis liberis sola
vi insita moveatur, ac detur tum motus totus sub initio, tum etiam motus
reliquus post spatium aliquod confectum, dabitur spatium totum quod corpus
infinito tempore describere potest. Erit enim spatium illud ad spatium jam
descriptum ut motus totus sub initio ad motus illius partem amissam.

Lemma I.

    _Quantitates differentiis suis proportionales, sunt continue
    proportionales._

Sit A ad A - B ut B ad B - C & C ad C - D &c. & dividendo fiet A ad B ut B
ad C & C ad D &c.   Q. E. D.

Prop. II. Theor. II.

    _Si corpori resistitur in ratione velocitatis, & sola vi insita per
    Medium similare moveatur, sumantur autem tempora æqualia: velocitates
    in principiis singulorum temporum sunt in progressione Geometrica, &
    spatia singulis temporibus descripta sunt ut velocitates._

_Cas. 1._ Dividatur tempus in particulas æquales, & si ipsis particularum
initiis agat vis resistentiæ impulsu unico, quæ sit ut velocitas, erit
decrementum velocitatis singulis temporis particulis ut eadem velocitas.
Sunt ergo velocitates differentiis suis proportionales, & propterea (per
Lem. I. Lib. II.) continue proportionales. Proinde si ex æquali
particularum numero componantur tempora quælibet æqualia, erunt velocitates
ipsis temporum initiis, ut termini in progressione continua, qui per saltum
capiuntur, omisso passim æquali terminorum intermediorum numero.
Componuntur autem horum terminorum rationes ex æqualibus rationibus
terminorum intermediorum æqualiter repetitis, & propterea sunt æquales.
Igitur velocitates his terminis proportionales, sunt in progressione
Geometrica. Minuantur jam æquales illæ temporum particulæ, & augeatur earum
numerus in infinitum, eo ut resistentiæ impulsus reddatur continuus, &
velocitates in principiis æqualium temporum, semper continue
proportionales, erunt in hoc etiam Casu continue proportionales.   Q. E. D.

[Illustration]

_Cas. 2._ Et divisim velocitatum differentiæ, hoc est earum partes singulis
temporibus amissæ, sunt ut totæ: Spatia autem singulis temporibus descripta
sunt ut velocitatum partes amissæ, (per Prop. I. Lib. II.) & propterea
etiam ut totæ.   Q. E. D.

_Corol._ Hinc si Asymptotis rectangulis ADC, CH describatur Hyperbola BG,
sintq; AB, DG ad Asymptoton AC perpendiculares, & exponatur tum corporis
velocitas tum resistentia Medii, ipso motus initio, per lineam quamvis
datam AC, elapso autem tempore aliquo per lineam indefinitam DC: exponi
potest tempus per aream ABGD, & spatium eo tempore descriptum per lineam
AD. Nam si area illa per motum puncti D augeatur uniformiter ad modum
temporis, decrescet recta DC in ratione Geometrica ad modum velocitatis, &
partes rectæ AC æqualibus temporibus descriptæ decrescent in eadem ratione.

Prop. III. Prob. I.

[Illustration]

    _Corporis, cui dum in Medio similari recta ascendit vel descendit,
    resistitur in ratione velocitatis, quodq; ab uniformi gravitate
    urgetur, definire motum._

Corpore ascendente, exponatur gravitas per datum quodvis rectangulum BC, &
resistentia Medii initio ascensus per rectangulum BD sumptum ad contrarias
partes. Asymptotis rectangulis AC, CH, per punctum B describatur Hyperbola
secans perpendicula DE, de in G, g; & corpus ascendendo, tempore DGgd,
describet spatium EGge, tempore DGBA spatium ascensus totius EGB, tempore
AB2G2D spatium descensus BF2G, atq; tempore 2D2G2g2d spatium descensus
2GF2e2g: & velocitates corporis (resistentiæ Medii proportionales) in horum
temporum periodis erunt ABED, ABed, nulla, ABF2D, AB2e2d respective; atq;
maxima velocitas, quam corpus descendendo potest acquirere, erit BC.

[Illustration]

Resolvatur enim rectangulum AH in rectangula innumera Ak, Kl, Lm, Mn, &c.
quæ sint ut incrementa velocitatum æqualibus totidem temporibus facta; &
erunt nihil, Ak, Al, Am, An, &c. ut velocitates totæ, atq; adeo (per
Hypothesin) ut resistentia Medii in principio singulorum temporum æqualium.
Fiat AC ad AK vel ABHC ad ABkK, ut vis gravitatis ad resistentiam in
principio temporis secundi, deq; vi gravitatis subducantur resistentiæ, &
manebunt ABHC, KkHC, LlHC, NnHC, &c. ut vires absolutæ quibus corpus in
principio singulorum temporum urgetur, atq; adeo (per motus Legem II.) ut
incrementa velocitatum, id est, ut rectangula Ak, Kl, Lm, Mn &c; &
propterea (per Lem. I. Lib. II.) in progressione Geometrica. Quare si rectæ
Kk, Ll, Mm, Nn &c. productæ occurrant Hyperbolæ in q, r, s, t &c. erunt
areæ ABqK, KqrL, LrsM, MstN &c. æquales, adeoq; tum temporibus tum viribus
gravitatis semper æqualibus analogæ. Est autem area ABqK (per Corol. 3.
Lem. VII. & Lem. VIII. Lib. I.) ad aream Bkq ut Kq ad ½kq seu AC ad ½AK,
hoc est ut vis gravitatis ad resistentiam in medio temporis primi. Et
simili argumento areæ qKLr, rLMs, sMNt, &c. sunt ad areas qklr, rlms, smnt
&c. ut vires gravitatis ad resistentias in medio temporis secundi, tertii,
quarti, &c. Proinde cum areæ æquales BAKq, qKLr, rLMs, sMNt, &c. sint
viribus grauitatis analogæ, erunt areæ Bkq, qklr, rlms, smnt, &c.
resistentiis in mediis singulorum temporum, hoc est, (per Hypothesin)
velocitatibus, atq; adeo descriptis spatiis analogæ. Sumantur analogarum
summæ, & erunt areæ Bkq, Blr, Bms, Bnt, &c. spatiis totis descriptis
analogæ; necnon areæ ABqK, ABrL, ABsM, ABtN, &c. temporibus. Corpus igitur
inter descendendum, tempore quovis ABrL, describit spatium Blr, & tempore
LrtN spatium rlnt.   Q. E. D.   Et similis est demonstratio motus expositi
in ascensu.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Igitur velocitas maxima, quam corpus cadendo potest acquirere,
est ad velocitatem dato quovis tempore acquisitam, ut vis data gravitatis
qua perpetuo urgetur, ad excessum vis hujus supra vim qua in fine temporis
illius resistitur.

_Corol. 2._ Tempore autem aucto in progressione Arithmetica, summa
velocitatis illius maximæ ac velocitatis in ascensu (atq; etiam earundem
differentia in descensu) decrescit in progressione Geometrica.

_Corol. 3._ Sed & differentiæ spatiorum, quæ in æqualibus temporum
differentiis describuntur, decrescunt in eadem progressione Geometrica.

_Corol. 4._ Spatium vero a corpore descriptum differentia est duorum
spatiorum, quorum alterum est ut tempus sumptum ab initio descensus, &
alterum ut velocitas, quæ etiam ipso descensus initio æquantur inter se.

Prop. IV. Prob. II.

    _Posito quod vis gravitatis in Medio aliquo similari uniformis sit, ac
    tendat perpendiculariter ad planum Horizontis; definire motum
    Projectilis, in eodem resistentiam velocitati proportionalem
    patientis._

[Illustration]

E loco quovis D egrediatur Projectile secundum lineam quamvis rectam DP, &
per longitudinem DP exponatur ejusdem velocitas sub initio motus. A puncto
P ad lineam Horizontalem DC demittatur perpendiculum PC, & secetur DC in A
ut sit DA ad AC ut resistentia Medii ex motu in altitudinem sub initio
orta, ad vim gravitatis; vel (quod perinde est) ut sit rectangulum sub DA &
DP ad rectangulum sub AC & CP ut resistentia tota sub initio motus ad vim
Gravitatis. Describatur Hyperbola quævis GTBS secans erecta perpendicula
DG, AB in G & B; & compleatur parallelogrammum DGKC, cujus latus GK secet
AB in Q. Capiatur linea N in ratione ad QB qua DC sit ad CP; & ad rectæ DC
punctum quodvis R erecto perpendiculo RT, quod Hyperbolæ in T, & rectis GK,
DP in t & V occurrat; in eo cape Vr æqualem tGT ÷ N, & Projectile tempore
DRTG perveniet ad punctum r, describens curvam lineam DraF, quam punctum r
semper tangit; perveniens autem ad maximam altitudinem a in perpendiculo
AB, & postea semper appropinquans ad Asymptoton PLC. Estq; velocitas ejus
in puncto quovis r ut Curvæ Tangens rL.   Q. E. I.

Est enim N ad QB ut DC ad CP seu DR ad RV, adeoq; RV æqualis DR × QB ÷ N, &
Rr (id est RV - Vr seu {DR × QB - tGT} ÷ N) æqualis {DR × AB - RDGT} ÷ N.
Exponatur jam tempus per aream RDGT, & (per Legum Corol. 2.) distinguatur
motus corporis in duos, unum ascensus, alterum ad latus. Et cum resistentia
sit ut motus, distinguetur etiam hæc in partes duas partibus motus
proportionales & contrarias: ideoq; longitudo a motu ad latus descripta
erit (per Prop. II. hujus) ut linea DR, altitudo vero (per Prop. III.
hujus) ut area DR × AB - RDGT, hoc est, ut linea Rr. Ipso autem motus
initio area RDGT æqualis est rectangulo DR × AQ, ideoq; linea illa Rr (seu
{DR × AB - DR × AQ} ÷ N) tunc est ad DR ut AB - AQ (seu QB) ad N, id est ut
CP ad DC; atq; adeo ut motus in altitudinem ad motum in longitudinem sub
initio. Cum igitur Rr semper sit ut altitudo, ac DR semper ut longitudo,
atq; Rr ad DR sub initio ut altitudo ad longitudinem: necesse est ut Rr
semper sit ad DR ut altitudo ad longitudinem, & propterea ut corpus
moveatur in linea DraF, quam punctum r perpetuo tangit.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si vertice D, Diametro DE deorsum producta, & latere recto
quod sit ad 2DP ut resistentia tota, ipso motus initio, ad vim gravitatis,
Parabola construatur: velocitas quacum corpus exire debet de loco D
secundum rectam DP, ut in Medio uniformi resistente describat Curvam DraF,
ea ipsa erit quacum exire debet de eodem loco D, secundum eandem rectam DR,
ut in spatio non resistente describat Parabolam. Nam Latus rectum Parabolæ
hujus, ipso motus initio, est DV quad. ÷ Vr & Vr est tGT ÷ N seu DR × Tt ÷
2N. Recta autem, quæ, si duceretur, Hyperbolam GTB tangeret in G, parallela
est ipsi DK, ideoq; Tt est CK × DR ÷ DC, & N erat QB × DC ÷ CP. Et
propterea Vr est DRq. × CK × CP ÷ {2CDq. × QB}, id est (ob proportionales
DR & DC, DV & DP) DVq. × CK × CP ÷ {2DPq. × QB}, & Latus rectum DV quad. ÷
Vr prodit 2DPq. × QB ÷ {CK × CP}, id est (ob proportionales QB & CK, DA &
AC) 2DPq. × DA ÷ {AC × CP}, adeoq; ad 2DP ut DP × DA ad PC × AC; hoc est ut
resistentia ad gravitatem.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 2._ Unde si corpus de loco quovis D, data cum velocitate, secundum
rectam quamvis positione datam DP projiciatur; & resistentia Medii ipso
motus initio detur, inveniri potest Curva DraF, quam corpus idem describet.
Nam ex data velocitate datur latus rectum Parabolæ, ut notum est. Et
sumendo 2DP ad latus illud rectum ut est vis Gravitatis ad vim resistentiæ,
datur DP. Dein secando DC in A, ut sit CP × AC ad DP × DA in eadem illa
ratione Gravitatis ad resistentiam, dabitur punctum A. Et inde datur Curva
DraF.

_Corol. 3._ Et contra, si datur curva DraF, dabitur & velocitas corporis &
resistentia Medii in locis singulis r. Nam ex data ratione CP × AC ad DP ×
DA, datur tum resistentia Medii sub initio motus, tum latus rectum
Parabolæ: & inde datur etiam velocitas sub initio motus. Deinde ex
longitudine tangentis rL, datur & huic proportionalis velocitas, &
velocitati proportionalis resistentia in loco quovis r.

_Corol. 4._ Cum autem longitudo 2DP sit ad latus rectum Parabolæ ut
gravitas ad resistentiam in D; & ex aucta Velocitate augeatur resistentia
in eadem ratione, at latus rectum Parabolæ augeatur in ratione illa
duplicata: patet longitudinem 2DP augeri in ratione illa simplici, adeoq;
velocitati semper proportionalem esse, neq; ex angulo CDP mutato augeri vel
minui, nisi mutetur quoq; velocitas.

[Illustration]

_Corol. 5._ Unde liquet methodus determinandi Curvam DraF ex Phænomenis
quamproxime, & inde colligendi resistentiam & velocitatem quacum corpus
projicitur. Projiciantur corpora duo similia & æqualia eadem cum
velocitate, de loco D, secundum angulos diversos CDP, cDp (minuscularum
literarum locis subintellectis) & cognoscantur loca F, f, ubi incidunt in
horizontale planum DC. Tum, assumpta quacunq; longitudine pro DP vel Dp,
fingatur quod resistentia in D sit ad gravitatem in ratione qualibet, &
exponatur ratio illa per longitudinem quamvis SM. Deinde per computationem,
ex longitudine illa assumpta DP, inveniantur longitudines DF, Df, ac de
ratione Ff ÷ DF per calculum inventa, auferatur ratio eadem per
experimentum inventa, & exponatur differentia per perpendiculum MN. Idem
fac iterum ac tertio, assumendo semper novam resistentiæ ad gravitatem
rationem SM, & colligendo novam differentiam MN. Ducantur autem differentiæ
affirmativæ ad unam partem rectæ SM, & negativæ ad alteram; & per puncta N,
N, N agatur curva regularis NNN secans rectam SMMM in X, & erit SX vera
ratio resistentiæ ad gravitatem, quam invenire oportuit. Ex hac ratione
colligenda est longitudo DF per calculum; & longitudo quæ sit ad assumptam
longitudinem DP ut modo inventa longitudo DF ad longitudinem eandem per
experimentum cognitam, erit vera longitudo DP. Qua inventa, habetur tum
Curva Linea DraF quam corpus describit, tum corporis velocitas &
resistentia in locis singulis.

_Scholium._

Cæterum corpora resisti in ratione velocitatis Hypothesis est magis
Mathematica quam Naturalis. Obtinet hæc ratio quamproxime ubi corpora in
Mediis rigore aliquo præditis tardissime moventur. In Mediis autem quæ
rigore omni vacant (uti posthac demonstrabitur) corpora resistuntur in
duplicata ratione velocitatum. Actione corporis velocioris communicatur
eidem Medii quantitati, tempore minore, motus major in ratione majoris
velocitatis, adeoq; tempore æquali (ob majorem Medii quantitatem
perturbatam) communicatur motus in duplicata ratione major, estq;
resistentia (per motus Legem 2. & 3.) ut motus communicatus. Videamus
igitur quales oriantur motus ex hac lege Resistentiæ.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. II.

_De motu corporum quibus resistitur in duplicata ratione velocitatum._

Prop. V. Theor. III.

    _Si corpori resistitur in velocitatis ratione duplicata, & sola vi
    insita per Medium similare movetur, tempora vero sumantur in
    progressione Geometrica a minoribus terminis ad majores pergente: dico
    quod velocitates initio singulorum temporum sunt in eadem progressione
    Geometrica inverse, & quod spatia sunt æqualia quæ singulis temporibus
    describuntur._

[Illustration]

Nam quoniam quadrato velocitatis proportionalis est resistentia Medii, &
resistentiæ proportionale est decrementum velocitatis; si tempus in
particulas innumeras æquales dividatur, quadrata velocitatum singulis
temporum initiis erunt velocitatum earundem differentiis proportionalia.
Sunto temporis particulæ illæ AK, KL, LM, &c. in recta CD sumptæ, &
erigantur perpendicula AB, Kk, Ll, Mm, &c. Hyperbolæ BklmG, centro C
Asymptotis rectangulis CD, CH descriptæ occurrentia in B, k, l, m, &c. &
erit AB ad Kk ut CK ad CA, & divisim AB - Kk ad Kk ut AK ad CA, & vicissim
AB - Kk ad AK ut Kk ad CA, adeoq; ut AB × Kk ad AB × CA. Unde cum AK & AB ×
CA dentur, erit AB - Kk ut AB × Kk; & ultimo, ubi coeunt AB & Kk, ut ABq.
Et simili argumento erunt Kk - Ll, Ll - Mm, &c. ut Kkq., Llq. &c. Linearum
igitur AB, Kk, Ll, Mm quadrata sunt ut earundem differentiæ, & idcirco cum
quadrata velocitatum fuerint etiam ut ipsarum differentiæ, similis erit
ambarum progressio. Quo demonstrato, consequens est etiam ut areæ his
lineis descriptæ sint in progressione consimili cum spatiis quæ
velocitatibus describuntur. Ergo si velocitas initio primi temporis AK
exponatur per lineam AB, & velocitas initio secundi KL per lineam Kk, &
longitudo primo tempore descripta per arcam AKkB, velocitates omnes
subsequentes exponentur per lineas subsequentes Ll, Mm, &c. & longitudines
descriptæ per areas Kl, Lm, &c. & composite, si tempus totum exponatur per
summam partium suarum AM, longitudo tota descripta exponetur per summam
partium suarum AMmB. Concipe jam tempus AM ita dividi in partes AK, KL, LM,
&c. ut sint CA, CK, CL, CM, &c. in progressione Geometrica, & erunt partes
illæ in eadem progressione, & velocitates AB, Kk, Ll, Mm, &c. in
progressione eadem inversa, atq; spatia descripta Ak, Kl, Lm, &c. æqualia.
Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Patet ergo quod si tempus exponatur per Asymptoti partem
quamvis AD, & velocitas in principio temporis per ordinatim applicatam AB;
velocitas in fine temporis exponetur per ordinatam DG, & spatium totum
descriptum per aream Hyperbolicam adjacentem ABGD; necnon spatium quod
corpus aliquod eodem tempore AD, velocitate prima AB in Medio non
resistente describere posset, per rectangulum AB × AD.

_Corol. 2._ Unde datur spatium in Medio resistente descriptum, capiendo
illud ad spatium quod velocitate uniformi AB in Medio non resistente simul
describi posset, ut est area Hyperbolica ABGD ad rectangulum AB × AD.

_Corol. 3._ Datur etiam resistentia Medii, statuendo eam ipso motus initio
æqualem esse vi uniformi centripetæ, quæ, in cadente corpore, tempore AC,
in Medio non resistente, generare posset velocitatem AB. Nam si ducatur BT
quæ tangat Hyperbolam in B, & occurrat Asymptoto in T; recta AT æqualis
erit ipsi AC, & tempus exponet quo resistentia prima uniformiter continuata
tollere posset velocitatem totam AB.

_Corol. 4._ Et inde datur etiam proportio hujus resistentiæ ad vim
gravitatis, aliamve quamvis datam vim centripetam.

_Corol. 5._ Et viceversa, si datur proportio resistentiæ ad datam quamvis
vim centripetam, datur tempus AC, quo vis centripeta resistentiæ æqualis
generare possit velocitatem quamvis AB; & inde datur punctum B per quod
Hyperbola Asymptotis CH, CD describi debet; ut & spatium ABGD, quod corpus
incipiendo motum suum cum velocitate illa AB, tempore quovis AD, in Medio
similari resistente describere potest.

Prop. VI. Theor. IV.

[Illustration]

    _Corpora Sphærica homogenea & æqualia, resistentiis in duplicata
    ratione velocitatum impedita, & solis viribus insitis incitata,
    temporibus quæ sunt reciproce ut velocitates sub initio, describunt
    semper æqualia spatia, & amittunt partes velocitatum proportionales
    totis._

Asymptotis rectangulis CD, CH descripta Hyperbola quavis BbEe secante
perpendicula AB, ab, DE, de, in B, b, E, e, exponantur velocitates
initiales per perpendicula AB, DE, & tempora per lineas Aa, Dd. Est ergo ut
Aa ad Dd ita (per Hypothesin) DE ad AB, & ita (ex natura Hyperbolæ) CA ad
CD; & componendo, ita Ca ad Cd. Ergo areæ ABba, DEed, hoc est spatia
descripta æquantur inter se, & velocitates primæ AB, DE sunt ultimis ab,
de, & propterea (dividendo) partibus etiam suis amissis AB - ab, DE - de
proportionales.   Q. E. D.

Prop. VII. Theor. V.

    _Corpora Sphærica quibus resistitur in duplicata ratione velocitatum,
    temporibus quæ sunt ut motus primi directe & resistentiæ primæ inverse,
    amittent partes motuum proportionales totis, & spatia describent
    temporibus istis in velocitates primas ductis proportionalia._

Namq; motuum partes amissæ sunt ut resistentiæ & tempora conjunctim. Igitur
ut partes illæ sint totis proportionales, debebit resistentia & tempus
conjunctim esse ut motus. Proinde tempus erit ut Motus directe &
resistentia inverse. Quare temporum particulis in ea ratione sumptis,
corpora amittent semper particulas motuum proportionales totis, adeoq;
retinebunt velocitates in ratione prima. Et ob datam velocitatum rationem,
describent semper spatia quæ sunt ut velocitates primæ & tempora
conjunctim.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Igitur si æquivelocia corpora resistuntur in duplicata ratione
diametrorum, Globi homogenei quibuscunq; cum velocitatibus moti,
describendo spatia diametris suis proportionalia, amittent partes motuum
proportionales totis. Motus enim Globi cujusq; erit ut ejus velocitas &
Massa conjunctim, id est ut velocitas & cubus diametri; resistentia (per
Hypothesin) erit ut quadratum diametri & quadratum velocitatis conjunctim;
& tempus (per hanc Propositionem) est in ratione priore directe & ratione
posteriore inverse, id est ut diameter directe & velocitas inverse; adeoq;
spatium (tempori & velocitati proportionale) est ut diameter.

_Corol. 2._ Si æquivelocia corpora resistuntur in ratione sesquialtera
diametrorum: Globi homogenei quibuscunq; cum velocitatibus moti,
describendo spatia in sesquialtera ratione diametrorum inverse, amittent
partes motuum proportionales totis. Nam tempus augetur in ratione
resistentiæ diminutæ, & spatium augetur in ratione temporis.

_Corol. 3._ Et universaliter, si æquivelocia corpora resistuntur in ratione
dignitatis cujuscunq; diametrorum, spatia quibus Globi homogenei,
quibuscunq; cum velocitatibus moti, amittent partes motuum proportionales
totis, erunt ut cubi diametrorum ad dignitatem illam applicata. Sunto
diametri D & E; & si resistentiæ sint ut D^n & E^n, spatia quibus amittent
partes motuum proportionales totis, erunt ut D^{3 - n} & E^{3 - n}. Igitur
describendo spatia ipsis D^{3 - n} & E^{3 - n} proportionalia, retinebunt
velocitates in eadem ratione ad invicem ac sub initio.

_Corol. 4._ Quod si Globi non sint homogenei, spatium a Globo densiore
descriptum augeri debet in ratione densitatis. Motus enim sub pari
velocitate major est in ratione densitatis, & tempus (per hanc
Propositionem) augetur in ratione motus directe, ac spatium descriptum in
ratione temporis.

_Corol. 5._ Et si Globi moveantur in Mediis diversis, spatium in Medio,
quod cæteris paribus magis resistit, diminuendum erit in ratione majoris
resistentiæ. Tempus enim (per hanc Propositionem) diminuetur in ratione
resistentiæ, & spatium in ratione temporis.

Lemma II.

    _Momentum Genitæ æquatur momentis Terminorum singulorum generantium in
    eorundem laterum indices dignitatum & coefficientia continue ductis._

Genitam voco quantitatem omnem quæ ex Terminis quibuscunq; in Arithmetica
per multiplicationem, divisionem, & extractionem radicum; in Geometria per
inventionem vel contentorum & laterum, vel extremarum & mediarum
proportionalium absq; additione & subductione generatur. Ejusmodi
quantitates sunt Facti, Quoti, Radices, rectangula, quadrata, cubi, latera
quadrata, latera cubica & similes. Has quantitates ut indeterminatas &
instabiles, & quasi motu fluxuve perpetuo crescentes vel decrescentes hic
considero, & eorum incrementa vel decrementa momentanea sub nomine
momentorum intelligo: ita ut incrementa pro momentis addititiis seu
affirmativis, ac decrementa pro subductitiis seu negativis habeantur. Cave
tamen intellexeris particulas finitas. Momenta, quam primum finitæ sunt
magnitudinis, desinunt esse momenta. Finiri enim repugnat aliquatenus
perpetuo eorum incremento vel decremento. Intelligenda sunt principia
jamjam nascentia finitarum magnitudinum. Neq; enim spectatur in hoc Lemmate
magnitudo momentorum, sed prima nascentium proportio. Eodem recidit si loco
momentorum usurpentur vel velocitates incrementorum ac decrementorum, (quas
etiam motus, mutationes & fluxiones quantitatum nominare licet) vel finitæ
quævis quantitates velocitatibus hisce proportionales. Termini autem
cujusq; Generantis coefficiens est quantitas, quæ oritur applicando Genitam
ad hunc Terminum.

Igitur sensus Lemmatis est, ut si quantitatum quarumcunq; perpetuo motu
crescentium vel decrescentium A, B, C, &c. Momenta, vel mutationum
velocitates dicantur a, b, c, &c. momentum vel mutatio rectanguli AB fuerit
Ab + aB, & contenti ABC momentum fuerit ABc + AbC + aBC: & dignitatum A^2,
A^3, A^4, A^{1/2}, A^{3/2}, A^{1/3}, A^{2/3}, 1 ÷ A, 1 ÷ A^2, & 1 ÷ A^{1/2}
momenta 2Aa, 3aA^2, 4aA^3, 1/2aA^{-1/2}, 3/2aA^{1/2}, 1/3aA^{-2/3},
2/3aA^{-1/3}, -aA^{-2}, -2aA^{-3}, & -1/2aA^{-3/2} respective. Et
generaliter ut dignitatis cujuscunq; A^{n ÷ m} momentum fuerit n ÷ m
aA^{(n-m) ÷ m}. Item ut Genitæ A quad. × B momentum fuerit 2aAB + A^2b; &
Genitæ A^3B^4C^2 momentum 3aA^2B^4C^2 + 4A^3bB^3C^2 + 2A^3B^4Cc; & Genitæ
A^3 ÷ B^2 sive A^3B^{-2} momentum 3aA^2B^{-2} - 2A^3bB^{-3}: & sic in
cæteris. Demonstratur vero Lemma in hunc modum.

_Cas. 1._ Rectangulum quodvis motu perpetuo auctum AB, ubi de lateribus A &
B deerant momentorum dimidia ½a & ½b, fuit A - ½a in B - ½b, seu AB - ½aB -
½Ab + ¼ab; & quam primum latera A & B alteris momentorum dimidiis aucta
sunt, evadit A + ½a in B + ½b seu AB + ½aB + ½Ab + ¼ab. De hoc rectangulo
subducatur rectangulum prius, & manebit excessus aB + Ab. Igitur laterum
incrementis totis a & b generatur rectanguli incrementum aB + Ab.
Q. E. D.

_Cas. 2._ Ponatur AB æquale G, & contenti ABC seu GC momentum (per Cas. 1.)
erit gC + Gc, id est (si pro G & g scribantur AB & aB + Ab) aBC + AbC +
ABc. Et par est ratio contenti sub lateribus quotcunq;.   Q. E. D.

_Cas. 3._ Ponantur A, B, C æqualia; & ipsius A^2, id est rectanguli AB,
momentum aB + Ab erit 2aA, ipsius autem A^3, id est contenti ABC, momentum
aBC + AbC + ABc erit 3aA^2. Et eodem argumento momentum dignitatis
cujuscunq; A^n est naA^{n - 1}.   Q. E. D.

_Cas. 4._ Unde cum 1 ÷ A in A sit 1, momentum ipsius 1 ÷ A ductum in A, una
cum 1 ÷ A ducto in a erit momentum ipsius 1, id est nihil. Proinde momentum
ipsius 1 ÷ A seu A^{-1} est -a ÷ A^2. Et generaliter cum 1 ÷ A^n in A^n sit
1, momentum ipsius 1 ÷ A^n ductum in A^n una cum 1 ÷ A^n in naA^{n - 1}
erit nihil. Et propterea momentum ipsius 1 ÷ A^n seu A^{-n} erit -na ÷ A^{n
+ 1}.   Q. E. D.

_Cas. 5._ Et cum A^½ in A^½ sit A, momentum ipsius A^½ in 2A^½ erit a, per
Cas. 3: ideoq; momentum ipsius A^½ erit a ÷ 2A^½ sive 2aA^{-½}. Et
generaliter si ponatur A^{m ÷ n} æqualem B, erit A^m æquale B^n, ideoq;
maA^{m - 1} æquale nbB^{n - 1}, & maA^{-1} æquale nbB^{-1} seu nb ÷ A^{m ÷
n}, adeoq; {m ÷ n}aA^{(m-n) ÷ n} æquale b, id est æquale momento ipsius
A^{m ÷ n}.   Q. E. D.

_Cas. 6._ Igitur Genitæ cujuscunq; A^m B^n momentum est momentum ipsius A^m
ductum in B^n, una cum momento ipsius B^n ducto in A^m, id est maA^{m - 1}
+ nbB^{n - 1}; idq; sive dignitatum indices m & n sint integri numeri vel
fracti, sive affirmativi vel negativi. Et par est ratio contenti sub
pluribus dignitatibus.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc in continue proportionalibus, si terminus unus datur,
momenta terminorum reliquorum erunt ut iidem termini multiplicati per
numerum intervallorum inter ipsos & terminum datum. Sunto A, B, C, D, E, F
continue proportionales; & si detur terminus C, momenta reliquorum
terminorum erunt inter se ut -2A, -B, D, 2E, 3F.

_Corol. 2._ Et si in quatuor proportionalibus duæ mediæ dentur, momenta
extremarum erunt ut eædem extremæ. Idem intelligendum est de lateribus
rectanguli cujuscunq; dati.

_Corol. 3._ Et si summa vel differentia duorum quadratorum detur, momenta
laterum erunt reciproce ut latera.

_Scholium._

In literis quæ mihi cum Geometra peritissimo _G. G. Leibnitio_ annis abhinc
decem intercedebant, cum significarem me compotem esse methodi determinandi
Maximas & Minimas, ducendi Tangentes, & similia peragendi, quæ in terminis
surdis æque ac in rationalibus procederet, & literis transpositis hanc
sententiam involventibus [Data æquatione quotcunq; fluentes quantitates
involvente, fluxiones invenire, & vice versa] eandem celarem: rescripsit
Vir Clarissimus se quoq; in ejusmodi methodum incidisse, & methodum suam
communicavit a mea vix abludentem præterquam in verborum & notarum
formulis. Utriusq; fundamentum continetur in hoc Lemmate.

Prop. VIII. Theor. VI.

    _Si corpus in Medio uniformi, Gravitate uniformiter agente, recta
    ascendat vel descendat, & spatium totum descriptum distinguatur in
    partes æquales, inq; principiis singularum partium (addendo
    resistentiam Medii ad vim gravitatis, quando corpus ascendit, vel
    subducendo ipsam quando corpus descendit) colligantur vires absolutæ;
    dico quod vires illæ absolutæ sunt in progressione Geometrica._

[Illustration]

Exponatur enim vis gravitatis per datam lineam AC; resistentia per lineam
indefinitam AK; vis absoluta in descensu corporis per differentiam KC;
velocitas corporis per lineam AP (quæ sit media proportionalis inter AK &
AC, ideoq; in dimidiata ratione resistentiæ) incrementum resistentiæ data
temporis particula factum per lineolam KL, & contemporaneum velocitatis
incrementum per lineolam PQ; & centro C Asymptotis rectangulis CA, CH
describatur Hyperbola quævis BNS, erectis perpendiculis AB, KN, LO, PR, QS
occurrens in B, N, O, R, S. Quoniam AK est ut APq., erit hujus momentum KL
ut illius momentum 2APQ, id est ut AP in KC. Nam velocitatis incrementum
PQ, per motus Leg. 2. proportionale est vi generanti KC. Componatur ratio
ipsius KL cum ratione ipsius KN, & fiet rectangulum KL × KN ut AP × KC ×
KN; hoc est, ob datum rectangulum KC × KN, ut AP. Atqui areæ Hyperbolicæ
KNOL ad rectangulum KL × KN ratio ultima, ubi coeunt puncta K & L, est
æqualitatis. Ergo area illa Hyperbolica evanescens est ut AP. Componitur
igitur area tota Hyperbolica ABOL ex particulis KNOL velocitati AP semper
proportionalibus, & propterea spatio velocitate ista descripto
proportionalis est. Dividatur jam area illa in partes æquales ABMI, IMNK,
KNOL, &c. & vires absolutæ AC, IC, KC, LC, &c. erunt in progressione
Geometrica.   Q. E. D.   Et simili argumento, in ascensu corporis, sumendo,
ad contrariam partem puncti A, æquales areas ABmi, imnk, knol, &c.
constabit quod vires absolutæ AC, iC, kC, lC, &c. sunt continue
proportionales. Ideoq; si spatia omnia in ascensu & descensu capiantur
æqualia; omnes vires absolutæ lC, kC, iC, AC, IC, KC, LC, &c. erunt
continue proportionales.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si spatium descriptum exponatur per aream Hyperbolicam
ABNK; exponi possunt vis gravitatis, velocitas corporis & resistentia Medii
per lineas AC, AP & AK respective; & vice versa.

_Corol. 2._ Et velocitatis maximæ, quam corpus in infinitum descendendo
potest unquam acquirere, exponens est linea AC.

_Corol. 3._ Igitur si in data aliqua velocitate cognoscatur resistentia
Medii, invenietur velocitas maxima, sumendo ipsam ad velocitatem illam
datam in dimidiata ratione, quam habet vis Gravitatis ad Medii resistentiam
illam cognitam.

_Corol. 4._ Sed & particula temporis, quo spatii particula quam minima NKLO
in descensu describitur, est ut rectangulum KN × PQ. Nam quoniam spatium
NKLO est ut velocitas ducta in particulam temporis; erit particula temporis
ut spatium illud applicatum ad velocitatem, id est ut rectangulum quam
minimum KN × KL applicatum ad AP. Erat supra KL ut AP × PQ. Ergo particula
temporis est ut KN × PQ, vel quod perinde est, ut PQ ÷ CK. Q. E. D.

_Corol. 5._ Eodem argumento particula temporis, quo spatii particula nklo
in ascensu describitur, est ut pq ÷ Ck.

Prop. IX. Theor. VII.

    _Positis jam demonstratis, dico quod si Tangentes angulorum sectoris
    Circularis & sectoris Hyperbolici sumantur velocitatibus
    proportionales, existente radio justæ magnitudinis: erit tempus omne
    ascensus futuri ut sector Circuli, & tempus omne descensus præteriti ut
    sector Hyperbolæ._

Rectæ AC, qua vis gravitatis exponitur, perpendicularis & æqualis ducatur
AD. Centro D semidiametro AD describatur tum circuli Quadrans AtE, tum
Hyperbola rectangula AVZ axem habens AX, verticem principalem A &
Asymptoton DC. Jungantur Dp, DP, & erit sector circularis AtD ut tempus
ascensus omnis futuri; & Sector Hyperbolicus ATD ut tempus descensus omnis
præteriti, si modo Sectorem tangentes Ap & AP sint velocitates.

[Illustration]

_Cas. 1._ Agatur enim Dvq abscindens Sectoris ADt & trianguli ADp momenta,
seu particulas quam minimas simul descriptas tDv & pDq. Cum particulæ illæ,
ob angulum communem D, sunt in duplicata ratione laterum, erit particula
tDv ut qDp ÷ pD quad. Sed pD quad. est AD quad. + Ap quad. id est AD quad.
+ Ak × AD seu AD × Ck; & qDp est ½AD × pq. Ergo Sectoris particula vDt est
ut pq ÷ Ck, id est, per Corol. 5, Prop. VIII. ut particula temporis. Et
componendo fit summa particularum omnium tDv in Sectore ADt, ut summa
particularum temporis singulis velocitatis decrescentis Ap particulis
amissis pq respondentium, usq; dum velocitas illa in nihilum diminuta
evanuerit; hoc est, Sector totus ADt est ut ascensus totius futuri tempus.
Q. E. D.

_Cas. 2._ Agatur DQV abscindens tum Sectoris DAV, tum trianguli DAQ
particulas quam minimas TDV & PDQ; & erunt hæ particulæ ad invicem ut DTq.
ad DPq. id est (si TX & AP parallelæ sint) ut DXq. ad DAq. vel TXq. ad APq.
& divisim ut DXq. - TXq. ad ADq. - APq. Sed ex natura Hyperbolæ DXq. - TXq.
est ADq., & per Hypothesin APq. est AD × AK. Ergo particulæ sunt ad invicem
ut ADq. ad ADq. - AD × AK; id est ut AD ad AD - AK seu AC ad CK: ideoq;
Sectoris particula TDV est PDQ × AC ÷ CK, atq; adeo ob datas AC & AD, ut PQ
÷ CK; & propterea per Corol. 5. Prop. VIII. Lib. II. ut particula temporis
incremento velocitatis PQ respondens. Et componendo fit summa particularum
temporis, quibus omnes velocitatis AP particulæ PQ generantur, ut summa
particularum Sectoris ADT, id est tempus totum ut Sector totus.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si AB æquetur quartæ parti ipsius AC, spatium ABRP, quod
corpus tempore quovis ATD cadendo describit, erit ad spatium quod corpus
semisse velocitatis maximæ AC, eodem tempore uniformiter progrediendo
describere potest, ut area ABRP, qua spatium cadendo descriptum exponitur,
ad aream ATD qua tempus exponitur. Nam cum sit AC ad AP ut AP ad AK, erit
2APQ æquale AC × KL (per Corol. 1. Lem. II. hujus) adeoq; KL ad PQ ut 2AP
ad AC, & inde LKN ad PQ × ½AD seu DPQ ut 2AP × KN ad ½AC × AD. Sed erat DPQ
ad DTV ut CK ad AC. Ergo ex æquo LKN est ad DTV ut 2AP × KN × CK ad ½AC
cub.; id est, ob æquales CKN & ¼ACq., ut AP ad AC; hoc est ut velocitas
corporis cadentis ad velocitatem maximam quam corpus cadendo potest
acquirere. Cum igitur arearum ABKN & AVD momenta LKN & DTV sunt ut
velocitates, erunt arearum illarum partes omnes simul genitæ ut spatia
simul descripta, ideoq; areæ totæ ab initio genitæ ABKN & AVD ut spatia
tota ab initio descensus descripta.   Q. E. D.

_Corol. 2._ Idem consequitur etiam de spatio quod in ascensu describitur.
Nimirum quod spatium illud omne sit ad spatium, uniformi cum velocitate AC
eodem tempore descriptum, ut est area ABnk ad Sectorem ADt.

_Corol. 3._ Velocitas corporis tempore ATD cadentis est ad velocitatem,
quam eodem tempore in spatio non resistente acquireret, ut triangulum APD
ad Sectorem Hyperbolicum ATD. Nam velocitas in Medio non resistente foret
ut tempus ATD, & in Medio resistente est ut AP, id est ut triangulum APD.
Et velocitates illæ initio descensus æquantur inter se, perinde ut areæ
illæ ATD, APD.

_Corol. 4._ Eodem argumento velocitas in ascensu est ad velocitatem, qua
corpus eodem tempore in spatio non resistente omnem suum ascendendi motum
amittere posset, ut triangulum ApD ad Sectorem circularem AtD, sive ut
recta Ap ad arcum At.

_Corol. 5._ Est igitur tempus quo corpus in Medio resistente cadendo
velocitatem AP acquirit, ad tempus quo velocitatem maximam AC in spatio non
resistente cadendo acquirere posset, ut Sector ADT ad triangulum ADC: &
tempus, quo velocitatem Ap in Medio resistente ascendendo possit amittere,
ad tempus quo velocitatem eandem in spatio non resistente ascendendo posset
amittere, ut arcus At ad ejus Tangentem Ap.

_Corol. 6._ Hinc ex dato tempore datur spatium ascensu vel descensu
descriptum. Nam corporis in infinitum descendentis datur velocitas maxima,
per Corol. 2. & 3. Theor. VI, Lib. II. indeq; datur & spatium quod semisse
velocitatis illius dato tempore describi potest, & tempus quo corpus
velocitatem illam in spatio non resistente cadendo posset acquirere. Et
sumendo Sectorem ADT vel ADt ad triangulum ADC in ratione temporum; dabitur
tum velocitas AP vel Ap, tum area ABKN vel ABkn, quæ est ad Sectorem ut
spatium quæsitum ad spatium jam ante inventum.

_Corol. 7._ Et regrediendo, ex dato ascensus vel descensus spatio ABnk vel
ABNK, dabitur tempus ADt vel ADT.

Prop. X. Prob. III.

    _Tendat uniformis vis gravitatis directe ad planum Horizontis, sitq;
    resistentia ut medii densitas & quadratum velocitatis conjunctim:
    requiritur tum Medii densitas in locis singulis, quæ faciat ut corpus
    in data quavis linea curva moveatur, tum corporis velocitas in iisdem
    locis._

[Illustration]

Sit AK planum illud plano Schematis perpendiculare; ACK linea curva; C
corpus in ipsa motum; & FCf recta ipsam tangens in C. Fingatur autem corpus
C nunc progredi ab A ad K per lineam illam ACK, nunc vero regredi per
eandem lineam; & in progressu impediri a Medio, in regressu æque promoveri,
sic ut in iisdem locis eadem semper sit corporis progredientis &
regredientis velocitas. Æqualibus autem temporibus describat corpus
progrediens arcum quam minimum CG, & corpus regrediens arcum Cg; & sint CH,
Ch longitudines æquales rectilineæ, quas corpora de loco C exeuntia, his
temporibus, absq; Medii & Gravitatis actionibus describerent: & a punctis
C, G, g, ad planum horizontale AK demittantur perpendicula CB, GD, gd,
quorum GD ac gd tangenti occurrant in F & f. Per Medii resistentiam fit ut
corpus progrediens, vice longitudinis CH, describat solummodo longitudinem
CF; & per vim gravitatis transfertur corpus de F in G: adeoq; lineola HF vi
resistentiæ, & lineola FG vi gravitatis simul generantur. Proinde (per Lem.
X. Lib. I.) lineola FG est ut vis gravitatis & quadratum temporis
conjunctim, adeoq; (ob datam gravitatem) ut quadratum temporis; & lineola
HF ut resistentia & quadratum temporis, hoc est ut resistentia & lineola
FG. Et inde resistentia fit ut HF directe & FG inverse, sive ut HF ÷ FG.
Hæc ita se habent in lineolis nascentibus. Nam in lineolis finitæ
magnitudinis hæ rationes non sunt accuratæ.

Et simili argumento est fg ut quadratum temporis, adeoq; ob æqualia tempora
æquatur ipsi FG; & impulsus quo corpus regrediens urgetur est ut hf ÷ fg.
Sed impulsus corporis regredientis & resistentia progredientis ipso motus
initio æquantur, adeoq; & ipsis proportionales hf ÷ fg & HF ÷ FG æquantur;
& propterea ob æquales fg & FG, æquantur etiam hf & HF, suntq; adeo CF, CH
(vel Ch) & Cf in progressione Arithmetica, & inde HF semidifferentia est
ipsarum Cf & CF; & resistentia quæ supra fuit ut HF ÷ FG, est ut {Cf - CF}
÷ FG.

Est autem resistentia ut Medii densitas & quadratum velocitatis. Velocitas
autem ut descripta longitudo CF directe & tempus [sqrt]FG inverse, hoc est
ut CF ÷ [sqrt]FG, adeoq; quadratum velocitatis ut CFq. ÷ FG. Quare
resistentia, ipsiq; proportionalis {Cf - CF} ÷ FG est ut Medii densitas &
ut CFq. ÷ FG conjunctim; & inde Medii densitas ut {Cf - CF} ÷ FG directe &
CFq. ÷ FG inverse, id est ut {Cf - CF} ÷ CFq.   Q. E. I.

_Corol. 1._ Et hinc colligitur, quod si in Cf capiatur Ck æqualis CF, & ad
planum horizontale AK demittatur perpendiculum ki, secans curvam ACK in l;
fiet Medii densitas ut {FG - kl} ÷ {CF × {FG + kl}}. Erit enim fC ad kC ut
[sqrt]fg seu [sqrt]FG ad [sqrt]kl, & divisim fk ad kC, id est Cf - CF ad CF
ut [sqrt]FG - [sqrt]kl ad [sqrt]kl; hoc est (si ducatur terminus uterq; in
[sqrt]FG + [sqrt]kl) ut FG - kl ad kl + [sqrt]FG × kl, sive ad FG + kl. Nam
ratio prima nascentium kl + [sqrt]FG × kl & FG + kl est æqualitatis.
Scribatur itaq; {FK - Kl} ÷ {FK + Kl} pro {Cf - CF} ÷ CF; & Medii densitas,
quæ fuit ut {Cf - CF} ÷ CF quad. evadet ut {FG - kl} ÷ {CF × FG + kl}.

_Corol. 2._ Unde cum 2HF & Cf - CF æquentur, & FG & kl (ob rationem
æqualitatis) componant 2FG; erit 2HF ad CF ut FG - kl ad 2FG; et inde HF ad
FG, hoc est resistentia ad gravitatem, ut rectangulum CF in FG - kl ad 4FG
quad.

_Corol. 3._ Et hinc si curva linea definiatur per relationem inter basem
seu abscissam AB & ordinatim applicatam BC; (ut moris est) & valor
ordinatim applicatæ resolvatur in seriem convergentem: Problema per primos
seriei terminos expedite solvetur: ut in Exemplis sequentibus.

_Exempl. 1._ Sit Linea ACK semicirculus super diametro AK descriptus, &
requiratur Medii densitas quæ faciat ut Projectile in hac linea moveatur.

Bisecetur semicirculi diameter AK in O; & dic OK n, OB a, BC e, & BD vel Bi
o: & erit DGq. seu OGq. - ODq. æquale nn - aa - 2ao - oo seu ee - 2ao - oo;
& radice per methodum nostram extracta, fiet DG = e - ao ÷ e - oo ÷ 2e -
aaoo ÷ 2e^3 - ao^3 ÷ 2e^3 - a^3o^3 ÷ 2e^5 &c. Hic scribatur nn pro ee + aa
& evadet DG = e - ao ÷ e - nnoo ÷ 2e^3 - anno^3 ÷ 2e^5 &c.

Hujusmodi Series distinguo in terminos successivos in hunc modum. Terminum
primum appello in quo quantitas infinite parva o non extat; secundum in quo
quantitas illa extat unius dimensionis; tertium in quo extat duarum,
quartum in quo trium est, & sic in infinitum. Et primus terminus, qui hic
est e, denotabit semper longitudinem ordinatæ BC insistentis ad indefinitæ
quantitatis initium B; secundus terminus qui hic est ao ÷ e, denotabit
differentiam inter BC & DF, id est lineolam IF, quæ abscinditur complendo
parallelogrammum BC - ID, atq; adeo positionem Tangentis CF semper
determinat: ut in hoc casu capiendo IF ad IC ut est ao ÷ e ad o seu a ad e.
Terminus tertius, qui hic est nnoo ÷ 2e^3 designabit lineolam FG, quæ jacet
inter Tangentem & Curvam, adeoq; determinat angulum contactus FCG, seu
curvaturam quam curva linea habet in C. Si lineola illa FG finitæ est
magnitudinis, designabitur per terminum tertium una cum subsequentibus in
infinitum. At si lineola illa minuatur in infinitum, termini subsequentes
evadent infinite minores tertio, ideoq; negligi possunt. Terminus quartus,
qui hic est anno^3 ÷ 2e^5, exhibet variationem Curvaturæ; quintus
variationem variationis, & sic deinceps. Unde obiter patet usus non
contemnendus harum Serierum in solutione Problematum, quæ pendent a
Tangentibus & curvatura Curvarum.

Præterea CF est latus quadratum ex CIq. & IFq. hoc est ex BDq. & quadrato
termini secundi. Estq; FG + kl æqualis duplo termini tertii, & FG - kl
æqualis duplo quarti. Nam valor ipsius DG convertitur in valorem ipsius il,
& valor ipsius FG in valorem ipsius kl, scribendo Bi pro BD, seu -o pro +o.
Proinde cum FG sit - nnoo ÷ 2e^3 - anno^3 ÷ 2e^5 &c. erit kl = - nnoo ÷
2e^3 + anno^3 ÷ 2e^5, &c. Et horum summa est - nnoo ÷ e^3, differentia -
anno^3 ÷ e^5. Terminum quintum & sequentes hic negligo, ut infinite minores
quam qui in hoc Problemate considerandi veniant. Itaq; si designetur Series
universaliter his terminis ± Qo - Roo - So^3 &c. erit CF æqualis [sqrt]{oo
+ QQoo}, FG + kl æqualis 2Roo, & FG - kl æqualis 2So^3. Pro CF, FG + kl &
FG - kl scribantur hi earum valores, & Medii densitas quæ erat ut {FG - kl}
÷ {CF in FG + kl} jam fiet ut S ÷ {R [sqrt]{1 + QQ}}. Deducendo igitur
Problema unumquodq; ad seriem convergentem, & hic pro Q, R & S scribendo
terminos seriei ipsis respondentes; deinde etiam ponendo resistentiam Medii
in loco quovis G esse ad Gravitatem ut S[sqrt]{1 + QQ} ad 2RR, &
velocitatem esse illam ipsam quacum corpus, de loco C secundum rectam CF
egrediens, in Parabola, diametrum CB & latus rectum {1 + QQ} ÷ R habente,
deinceps moveri posset, solvetur Problema.

Sic in Problemate jam solvendo, si scribantur [sqrt]1 + aa ÷ ee seu n ÷ e
pro [sqrt]{1 + QQ}, nn ÷ 2e^3 pro R, & ann ÷ 2e^3 pro S, prodibit Medii
densitas ut a ÷ ne, hoc est (ob datam n) ut a ÷ e seu OB ÷ BC, id est ut
Tangentis longitudo illa CT, quæ ad semidiametrum OL ipsi AK normaliter
insistentem terminatur, & resistentia erit ad gravitatem ut a ad n, id est
ut OB ad circuli semidiametrum OK, velocitas autem erit ut [sqrt]2BC.
Igitur si corpus C certa cum velocitate, secundum lineam ipsi OK
parallelam, exeat de loco L, & Medii densitas in singulis locis C sit ut
longitudo tangentis CT, & resistentia etiam in loco aliquo C sit ad vim
gravitatis ut OB ad OK; corpus illud describet circuli quadrantem LCK.
Q. E. I.

At si corpus idem de loco A secundum lineam ipsi AK perpendicularem
egrederetur, sumenda esset OB seu a ad contrarias partes centri O, &
propterea signum ejus mutandum esset, & scribendum -a pro +a. Quo pacto
prodiret Medii densitas ut -a ÷ e. Negativam autem densitatem (hoc est quæ
motus corporum accelerat) Natura non admittit, & propterea naturaliter
fieri non potest ut corpus ascendendo ab A describat circuli quadrantem AL.
Ad hunc effectum deberet corpus a Medio impellente accelerari, non a
resistente impediri.

_Exempl. 2._ Sit linea ALCK Parabola, axem habens OL horizonti AK
perpendicularem, & requiratur Medii densitas quæ faciat ut projectile in
ipsa moveatur.

Ex natura Parabolæ, rectangulum ADK æquale est rectangulo sub ordinata DG &
recta aliqua data: hoc est, si dicantur recta illa b, AB a, AK c, BC e & BD
o; rectangulum a + o in c - a - o seu ac - aa - 2ao + co - oo æquale est
rectangulo b in DG, adeoq; DG æquale {ac - aa} ÷ b + {{c - 2a} ÷ b}o - oo ÷
b. Jam scribendus esset hujus seriei secundus terminus {{c - 2a} ÷ b} o pro
Qo, & ejus coefficiens {c - 2a} ÷ b pro Q; tertius item terminus oo ÷ b pro
Roo, & ejus coefficiens 1 ÷ b pro R. Cum vero plures non sint termini,
debebit quarti termini So^3 coefficiens S evanescere, & propterea quantitas
S ÷ R[sqrt]{1 + QQ} cui Medii densitas proportionalis est, nihil erit.
Nulla igitur Medii densitate movebitur Projectile in Parabola, uti olim
demonstravit _Galilæus_.   Q. E. I.

[Illustration]

_Exempl. 3._ Sit linea AGK Hyperbola, Asymptoton habens NX plano
horizontali AK perpendicularem; & quæratur Medii densitas quæ faciat ut
Projectile moveatur in hac linea.

Sit MX Asymptotos altera, ordinatim applicatæ DG productæ occurrens in V, &
ex natura Hyperbolæ, rectangulum XV in VG dabitur. Datur autem ratio DN ad
VX, & propterea datur etiam rectangulum DN in VG. Sit illud bb; & completo
parallelogrammo DNXZ, dicatur BN a, BD o, NX c, & ratio data VZ ad ZX vel
DN ponatur esse m ÷ n. Et erit DN æqualis a - o, VG æqualis bb ÷ {a - o},
VZ æqualis m ÷ n {a - o}, & GD seu NX - VZ - VG æqualis c - {m ÷ n}a + {m ÷
n}o - bb ÷ {a - o}. Resolvatur terminus bb ÷ {a - o} in seriem convergentem
bb ÷ a + {bb ÷ aa}o + {bb ÷ a^3}oo + {bb ÷ a^4}o^3 etc. & fiet GD æqualis c
- {m ÷ n}a - bb ÷ a + {m ÷ n}o - {bb ÷ aa}o - {bb ÷ a^3}o^2 - {bb ÷ a^4}o^3
&c. Hujus seriei terminus secundus {m ÷ n}o - {bb ÷ aa}o usurpandus est pro
Qo, tertius cum signo mutato {bb ÷ a^3}o^2 pro Ro^2, & quartus cum signo
etiam mutato {bb ÷ a^4}o^3 pro So^3, eorumq; coefficientes m ÷ n - bb ÷ aa,
bb ÷ a^3 & bb ÷ a^4 scribendæ sunt, in Regula superiore, pro Q, R & S. Quo
facto prodit medii densitas ut

                 bb
                ---
                a^4                                  1
   ------------------------------ seu ------------------------------
          ---------------------           -------------------------
   bb    /    mm   2mbb   b^4            /     mm      2mbb   b^4
   --   / 1 - -- - ---- + ---           / aa + -- aa - ---- + ----
   a^3\/      nn    naa   a^4         \/       nn        n     aa

est, si in VZ sumatur VY æqualis VG, ut 1 ÷ XY. Namq; aa & {mm ÷ nn}aa -
2mbb ÷ n + b^4 ÷ aa sunt ipsarum XZ & ZY quadrata. Resistentia autem
invenitur in ratione ad Gravitatem quam habet XY ad YG, & velocitas ea est
quacum corpus in Parabola pergeret verticem G diametrum DG & latus rectum
YX quad. ÷ VG habente. Ponatur itaq; quod Medii densitates in locis
singulis G sint reciproce ut distantiæ XY, quodq; resistentia in loco
aliquo G sit ad gravitatem ut XY ad YG; & corpus de loco A justa cum
velocitate emissum describet Hyperbolam illam AGK.   Q. E. I.

_Exempl. 4._ Ponatur indefinite, quod linea AGK Hyperbola sit, centro X
Asymptotis MX, NX, ea lege descripta, ut constructo rectangulo XZDN cujus
latus ZD secet Hyperbolam in G & Asymptoton ejus in V, fuerit VG reciproce
ut ipsius ZX vel DN dignitas aliqua ND^n, cujus index est numerus n: &
quæratur Medii densitas, qua Projectile progrediatur in hac curva.

Pro DN, BD, NX scribantur A, O, C respective, sitq; VZ ad ZX vel DN ut d ad
e, & VG æqualis bb ÷ DN^n, & erit DN æqualis A - O, VG = bb ÷ {A - O}^n, VZ
= d ÷ e in A - O, & GD seu NX - VZ - VG æqualis C - {d ÷ e}A + {d ÷ e}O -
bb ÷ {A - O}^n. Resolvatur terminus ille bb ÷ {A - O}^n in seriam infinitam

   bb      nbbO      nn + n          n^3 + 3nn + 2n
  ----- + ------- + -------- bbO^2 + -------------- bbO^3 &c.
   A^n    A^{n+1}   2A^{n+2}            6A^{n+3}

ac fiet GD æqualis

      d    bb      d      nbb       nn + n         n^3 + 3nn + 2n
  C - -A - ----- + -O - -------O - --------bbO^2 - --------------bbO^3 &c.
      e    A^n     e    A^{n+1}    2A^{n+2}           6A^{n+3}

Hujus seriei terminus secundus {d ÷ e}O - {nbb ÷ A^{n+1}}O usurpandus est
pro Qo, tertius {{nn + n} ÷ 2A^{n+2}}bbO^2 pro Ro^2, quartus {{n^3 + 3nn +
2n} ÷ 6A^{n+3}}bbO^3 pro So^3. Et inde Medii densitas S ÷ {R × [sqrt]{1 +
QQ}}, in loco quovis G, fit

                 n + 2
  --------------------------------------- ,
       --------------------------------
      /      dd       2dnbb      nnb^4
  3  / A^2 + -- A^2 - ------ A + ------
   \/        ee        eA^n      A^{2n}

adeoq; si in VZ capiatur VY æqualis n × VG, est reciproce ut XY. Sunt enim
A^2 & {dd ÷ ee}A^2 - 2dnbb ÷ eA^n in A + nnb^4 ÷ A^{2n} ipsarum XZ & ZY
quadrata. Resistentia autem in eodem loco G fit ad Gravitatem ut S in XY ÷
A ad 2RR, id est XY ad {{3nn + 3n} ÷ {n + 2}}VG. Et velocitas ibidem ea
ipsa est quacum corpus projectum in Parabola pergeret, verticem G,
diametrum GD & Latus rectum {1 + QQ} ÷ R seu 2XY quad. ÷ {{nn + n} in VG}
habente.   _Q. E. I._

_Scholium._

Quoniam motus non fit in Parabola nisi in Medio non resistente, in
Hyperbolis vero hic descriptis fit per resistentiam perpetuam; perspicuum
est quod linea, quam Projectile in Medio uniformiter resistente describit,
propius accedit ad Hyperbolas hasce quam ad Parabolam. Est utiq; linea illa
Hyperbolici generis, sed quæ circa verticem magis distat ab Asymptotis; in
partibus a vertice remotioribus propius ad ipsas accedit quam pro ratione
Hyperbolarum quas hic descripsi. Tanta vero non est inter has & illam
differentia, quin illius loco possint hæ in rebus practicis non incommode
adhiberi. Et utiliores forsan futuræ sunt hæ, quam Hyperbola magis accurata
& simul magis composita. Ipsæ vero in usum sic deducentur.

Compleatur parallelogrammum XYGT, & ex natura harum Hyperbolarum facile
colligitur quod recta GT tangit Hyperbolam in G, ideoq; densitas Medii in G
est reciproce ut tangens GT, & velocitas ibidem ut [sqrt]{GTq. ÷ GV},
resistentia autem ad vim gravitatis ut GT ad {{3nn + 3n} ÷ {n + 2}}GV.

Proinde si corpus de loco A secundum rectam AH projectum describat
Hyperbolam AGK, & AH producta occurrat Asymptoto NX in H, actaq; AI
occurrat alteri Asymptoto MX in I: erit Medii densitas in A reciproce ut
AH, & corporis velocitas ut [sqrt]{AHq. ÷ AI}, ac resistentia ibidem ad
Gravitatem ut AH ad {3nn + 3n} ÷ {n + 2} in AI. Unde prodeunt sequentes
Regulæ.

_Reg. 1._ Si servetur Medii densitas in A & mutetur angulus NAH, manebunt
longitudines AH, AI, HX. Ideoq; si longitudines illæ in aliquo casu
inveniantur, Hyperbola deinceps ex dato quovis angulo NAH expedite
determinari potest.

_Reg. 2._ Si servetur tum angulus NAH tum Medii densitas in A, & mutetur
velocitas quacum corpus projicitur; servabitur longitudo AH, & mutabitur AI
in duplicata ratione velocitatis reciproce.

_Reg. 3._ Si tam angulus NAH quam corporis velocitas in A, gravitasq;
acceleratrix servetur, & proportio resistentiæ in A ad gravitatem motricem
augeatur in ratione, quacunque: augebitur proportio AH ad AI eadem ratione,
manente Parabolæ latere recto, eiq; proportionali longitudine AHq. ÷ AI; &
propterea minuetur AH in eadem ratione, & AI minuetur in ratione illa
duplicata. Augetur vero proportio resistentiæ ad pondus, ubi vel gravitas
specifica sub æquali magnitudine fit minor, vel Medii densitas major, vel
resistentia, ex magnitudine diminuta, diminuitur in minore ratione quam
pondus.

_Reg. 4._ Quoniam densitas Medii prope verticem Hyperbolæ major est quam in
loco A, ut servetur densitas mediocris, debet ratio minimæ tangentium GT ad
Tangentem AH inveniri, & densitas in A, per Regulam tertiam, diminui in
ratione paulo minore quam semisummæ Tangentium ad Tangentium AH.

_Reg. 5._ Si dantur longitudines AH, AI, & describenda sit figura AGK:
produc HN ad X, ut sit HX æqualis facto sub n + 1 & AI; centroq; X &
Asymptotis MX, NX per punctum A describatur Hyperbola, ea lege ut sit AI ad
quamvis VG ut XV^n ad XI^n.

[Illustration]

_Reg. 6._ Quo major est numerus n, eo magis accuratæ sunt hæ Hyperbolæ in
ascensu corporis ab A, & minus accuratæ in ejus descensu ad G; & contra.
Hyperbola Conica mediocrem rationem tenet, estq; cæteris simplicior. Igitur
si Hyperbola sit hujus generis, & punctum K, ubi corpus projectum incidet
in rectam quamvis AN per punctum A transeuntem, quæratur: occurrat producta
AN Asymptotis MX, NX in M & N, & sumatur NK ipsi AM æqualis.

_Reg. 7._ Et hinc liquet methodus expedita determinandi hanc Hyperbolam ex
Phænomenis. Projiciantur corpora duo similia & æqualia eadem velocitate, in
angulis diversis HAK, hAk, incidentq; in planum Horizontis in K & k; &
notetur proportio AK ad Ak. Sit ea d ad e. Tum erecto cujusvis longitudinis
perpendiculo AI, assume utcunq; longitudinem AH vel Ah, & inde collige
graphice longitudines AK, Ak, per Reg. 6. Si ratio AK ad Ak sit eadem cum
ratione d ad e, longitudo AH recte assumpta fuit. Sin minus cape in recta
infinita SM longitudinem SM æqualem assumptæ AH, & erige perpendiculum MN
æquale rationum differentiæ AK ÷ Ak - d ÷ e ductæ in rectam quamvis datam.
Simili methodo ex assumptis pluribus longitudinibus AH invenienda sunt
plura puncta N: & tum demum si per omnia agatur Curva linea regularis NNXN,
hæc abscindet SX quæsitæ longitudini AH æqualem. Ad usus Mechanicos
sufficit longitudines AH, AI easdem in angulis omnibus HAK retinere. Sin
figura ad inveniendam resistentiam Medij accuratius determinanda sit,
corrigendæ sunt semper hæ longitudines per Regulam quartam.

[Illustration]

_Reg. 8._ Inventis longitudinibus AH, HX; si jam desideretur positio rectæ
AH, secundum quam Projectile data illa cum velocitate emissum incidit in
punctum quodvis K: ad puncta A & K erigantur rectæ AC, KF horizonti
perpendiculares, quarum AC deorsum tendat, & æquetur ipsi AI seu ½HX.
Asymptotis AK, KF describatur Hyperbola, cujus Conjugata transeat per
punctum C, centroq; A & intervallo AH describatur Circulus secans
Hyperbolam illam in puncto H; & projectile secundum rectam AH emissum
incidet in punctum K.   _Q. E. I._   Nam punctum H, ob datam longitudinem
AH, locatur alicubi in circulo descripto. Agatur CH occurrens ipsis AK &
KF, illi in C, huic in F, & ob parallelas CH, MX & æquales AC, AI, erit AE
æqualis AM, & propterea etiam æqualis KN. Sed CE est ad AE ut FH ad KN, &
propterea CE & FH æquantur. Incidit ergo punctum H in Hyperbolam Asymptotis
AK, KF descriptam, cujus conjugata transit per punctum C, atq; adeo
reperitur in communi intersectione Hyperbolæ hujus & circuli descripti.
_Q. E. D._   Notandum est autem quod hæc operatio perinde se habet, sive
recta AKN horizonti parallela sit, sive ad horizontem in angulo quovis
inclinata: quodq; ex duabus intersectionibus H, H duo prodeunt anguli NAH,
NAH, quorum minor eligendus est; & quod in Praxi mechanica sufficit
circulum semel describere, deinde regulam interminatam CH ita applicare ad
punctum C, ut ejus pars FH, circulo & rectæ FK interjecta, æqualis sit ejus
parti CE inter punctum C & rectam HK sitæ.

[Illustration]

Quæ de Hyperbolis dicta sunt facile applicantur ad Parabolas. Nam si XAGK
Parabolam designet quam recta XV tangat in vertice X, sintq; ordinatim
applicatæ IA, VG ut quælibet abscissarum XI, XV dignitates XI^n, XV^n;
agantur XT, TG, HA, quarum XT parallela sit VG, & TG, HA parabolam tangant
in G & A: & corpus de loco quovis A, secundum rectam AH productam, justa
cum velocitate projectum, describet hanc Parabolam, si modo densitas Medij,
in locis singulis G, sit reciproce ut tangens GT. Velocitas autem in G ea
erit quacum Projectile pergeret, in spatio non resistente, in Parabola
Conica, verticem G, diametrum VG deorsum productam, & latus rectum
[sqrt]{2TGq. ÷ {nn - n}XVG} habente. Et resistentia in G erit ad vim
Gravitatis ut TG ad {{3nn - 3n} ÷ {n - 2}}VG. Vnde si NAK lineam
horizontalem designet, & manente tum densitate Medij in A, tum velocitate
quacum corpus projicitur, mutetur utcunq; angulus NAH; manebunt
longitudines AH, AI, HX, & inde datur Parabolæ vertex X, & positio rectæ
XI, & sumendo VG ad IA ut XV^n ad XI^n, dantur omnia Parabolæ puncta G, per
quæ Projectile transibit.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. III.

_De motu corporum quæ resistuntur partim in ratione velocitatis, partim in
ejusdem ratione duplicata._

Prop. XI. Theor. VIII.

    _Si corpus resistitur partim in ratione velocitatis, partim in
    velocitatis ratione duplicata, & sola vi insita in Medio similari
    movetur, sumantur autem tempora in progressione Arithmetica:
    quantitates velocitatibus reciproce proportionales, data quadam
    quantitate auctæ, erunt in progressione Geometrica._

[Illustration]

Centro C, Asymptotis rectangulis CADd & CH describatur Hyperbola BEeS, &
Asymptoto CH parallelæ sint AB, DE, de. In Asymptoto CD dentur puncta A, G:
Et si tempus exponatur per aream Hyperbolicam ABED uniformiter crescentem;
dico quod velocitas exponi potest per longitudinem DF, cujus reciproca GD
una cum data CG componat longitudinem CD in progressione Geometrica
crescentem.

Sit enim areola DEed datum temporis incrementum quam minimum, & erit Dd
reciproce ut DE, adeoque directe ut CD. Ipsius autem 1 ÷ GD decrementum,
quod (per hujus Lem. II.) est Dd ÷ GDq. erit ut CD ÷ GDq. seu {CG + GD} ÷
GDq., id est, ut {1 ÷ GD} + {CG ÷ GDq.}. Igitur tempore ABED per additionem
datarum particularum EDde uniformiter crescente, decrescit 1 ÷ GD in eadem
ratione cum velocitate. Nam decrementum velocitatis est ut resistentia, hoc
est (per Hypothesin) ut summa duarum quantitatum, quarum una est ut
velocitas, altera ut quadratum velocitatis; & ipsius 1 ÷ GD decrementum est
ut summa quantitatum 1 ÷ GD & CG ÷ GDq., quarum prior est ipsa 1 ÷ GD, &
posterior CG ÷ GDq. est ut 1 ÷ GDq.. Proinde 1 ÷ GD, ob analogum
decrementum, est ut velocitas. Et si quantitas GD ipsi 1 ÷ GD reciproce
proportionalis quantitate data CG augeatur, summa CD, tempore ABED
uniformiter crescente, crescet in progressione Geometrica.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Igitur si datis punctis A, G, exponatur tempus per aream
Hyperbolicam ABED, exponi potest velocitas per ipsius GD reciprocam 1 ÷ GD.

_Corol. 2._ Sumendo autem GA ad GD ut velocitatis reciproca sub initio, ad
velocitatis reciprocam in fine temporis cujusvis ABED, invenietur punctum
G. Eo autem invento, velocitas ex dato quovis alio tempore inveniri potest.

Prop. XII. Theor. IX.

    _Iisdem positis, dico quod si spatia descripta sumantur in progressione
    Arithmetica, velocitates data quadam quantitate auctæ erunt in
    progressione Geometrica._

In Asymptoto CD detur punctum R, & erecto perpendiculo RS, quod occurrat
Hyperbolæ in S, exponatur descriptum spatium per aream Hyperbolicam RSED; &
velocitas erit ut longitudo GD, quæ cum data CG componit longitudinem CD,
in Progressione Geometrica decrescentem, interea dum spatium RSED augetur
in Arithmetica.

Etenim ob datum spatii incrementum EDde, lineola Dd, quæ decrementum est
ipsius GD, erit reciproce ut ED, adeoq; directe ut CD, hoc est ut summa
ejusdem GD & longitudinis datæ CG. Sed velocitatis decrementum, tempore
sibi reciproce proportionali, quo data spatii particula DdeE describitur,
est ut resistentia & tempus conjunctim, id est directe ut summa duarum
quantitatum, quarum una est velocitas, altera ut velocitatis quadratum, &
inverse ut velocitas; adeoque directe ut summa dearum quantitatum, quarum
una datur, altera est ut velocitas. Igitur decrementum tam velocitatis quam
lineæ GD, est ut quantitas data & quantitas decrescens conjunctim, &
propter analoga decrementa, analogæ semper erunt quantitates decrescentes:
nimirum velocitas & linea GD.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Igitur si velocitas exponatur per longitudinem GD, spatium
descriptum erit ut area Hyperbolica DESR.

_Corol. 2._ Et si utcunque assumatur punctum R, invenietur punctum G,
capiendo GD ad GR ut est velocitas sub initio ad velocitatem post spatium
quodvis ABED descriptum. Invento autem puncto G, datur spatium ex data
velocitate, & contra.

_Corol. 3._ Unde cum, per Prop. XI. detur velocitas ex dato tempore, & per
hanc Propositionem detur spatium ex data velocitate; dabitur spatium ex
dato tempore: & contra.

Prop. XIII. Theor. X.

[Illustration]

    _Posito quod corpus ab uniformi gravitate deorsum attractum recta
    ascendit vel descendit, & resistitur partim in ratione velocitatis,
    partim in ejusdem ratione duplicata: dico quod si Circuli & Hyperbolæ
    diametris parallelæ rectæ per conjugatarum diametrorum terminos
    ducantur, & velocitates sint ut segmenta quædam parallelarum a dato
    puncto ducta, Tempora erunt ut arearum Sectores, rectis a centro ad
    segmentorum terminos ductis abscissi: & contra._

_Cas. 1._ Ponamus primo quod corpus ascendit, centroque D & semidiametro
quovis DB describatur circuli quadrans BETF, & per semidiametri DB terminum
B agatur infinita BAP, semidiametro DF parallela. In ea detur punctum A, &
capiatur segmentum AP velocitati proportionale. Et cum resistentiæ pars
aliqua sit ut velocitas & pars altera ut velocitatis quadratum, fit
resistentia tota in P ut AP quad. + 2PAB. Jungantur DA, DP circulum
secantes in E ac T, & exponatur gravitas per DA quadratum, ita ut sit
gravitas ad resistentiam in P ut DAq. ad APq. + 2PAB: & tempus ascensus
omnis futuri erit ut circuli sector EDTE.

Agatur enim DVQ, abscindens & velocitatis AP momentum PQ, & Sectoris DET
momentum DTV dato temporis momento respondens: & velocitatis decrementum
illud PQ erit ut summa virium gravitatis DBq. & resistentiæ APq. + 2BAP, id
est (per _Prop. 12. Lib. II._ Elem.) ut DP quad. Proinde area DPQ, ipsi PQ
proportionalis, est ut DP quad.; & area DTV, (quæ est ad aream DPQ ut DTq.
ad DPq.) est ut datum DTq. Decrescit igitur area EDT uniformiter ad modum
temporis futuri, per subductionem datarum particularum DTV, & propterea
tempori ascensus futuri proportionalis est.   _Q. E. D._

[Illustration]

_Cas. 2._ Si velocitas in ascensu corporis exponatur per longitudinem AP ut
prius, & resistentia ponatur esse ut APq. + 2BAP, & si vis gravitatis minor
sit quam quæ per DAq. exponi possit; capiatur BD ejus longitudinis, ut sit
ABq. - BDq. gravitati proportionale, sitque DF ipsi DB perpendicularis &
æqualis, & per verticem F describatur Hyperbola FTVE cujus semidiametri
conjugatæ sint DB & DF, quæq; secet DA in E, & DP, DQ in T & V; & erit
tempus ascensus futuri ut Hyperbolæ sector TDE.

Nam velocitatis decrementum PQ, in data temporis particula factum, est ut
summa resistentiæ APq. + 2ABP & gravitatis ABq. - BDq. id est ut BPq. -
BDq. Est autem area DTV ad aream DPQ ut DTq. ad DPq. adeoque, si ad DF
demittatur perpendiculum GT, ut GTq. seu GDq. - DFq. ad BDq. utque GDq. ad
PBq. & divisim ut DFq. ad BPq. - DBq. Quare cum area DPQ sit ut PQ, id est
ut BPq. - BDq. erit area DTV ut datum DFq. Decrescit igitur area EDT
uniformiter singulis temporis particulis æqualibus, per subductionem
particularum totidem datarum DTV, & propterea tempori proportionalis est.
_Q. E. D._

_Cas. 3._ Sit AP velocitas in descensu corporis, & APq. + 2ABP resistentia,
& DBq. - ABq. vis gravitatis, existente angulo DAB recto. Et si centro D,
vertice principali B, describatur Hyperbola rectangula BETV secans
productas DA, DP & DQ in E, T & V; erit Hyperbolæ hujus sector DET ut
tempus descensus.

[Illustration]

Nam velocitatis incrementum PQ, eiq; proportionalis area DPQ, est ut
excessus gravitatis supra resistentiam, id est, ut DBq. - ABq. - 2ABP -
APq. seu DBq. - BPq. Et area DTV est ad aream DPQ ut DTq. ad DPq. adeoq; ut
GTq. seu GDq. - BDq. ad BPq. utque GDq. ad BDq. & divisim ut BDq. ad BDq. -
BPq. Quare cum area DPQ sit ut BDq. - BPq. erit area DTV ut datum BDq.
Crescit igitur area EDT uniformiter singulis temporis particulis æqualibus,
per additionem totidem datarum particularum DTV, & propterea tempori
descensus proportionalis est.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol._ Igitur velocitas AP est ad velocitatem quam corpus tempore EDT, in
spatio non resistente, ascendendo amittere vel descendendo acquirere
posset, ut area trianguli DAP ad aream sectoris centro D, radio DA, angulo
ADT descripti; ideoque ex dato tempore datur. Nam velocitas in Medio non
resistente, tempori atque adeo Sectori huic proportionalis est; in Medio
resistente est ut triangulum; & in Medio utroq; ubi quam minima est,
accedit ad rationem æqualitatis, pro more Sectoris & Trianguli.

Prop. XIV. Prob. IV.

    _Iisdem positis, dico quod spatium ascensu vel descensu descriptum, est
    ut summa vel differentia areæ per quam tempus exponitur, & areæ
    cujusdam alterius quæ augetur vel diminuitur in progressione
    Arithmetica; si vires ex resistentia & gravitate compositæ sumantur in
    progressione Geometrica._

Capiatur AC (_in Fig. tribus ultimis,_) gravitati, & AK resistentiæ
proportionalis. Capiantur autem ad easdem partes puncti A si corpus
ascendit, aliter ad contrarias. Erigatur Ab quæ sit ad DB ut DBq. ad 4BAC:
& area AbNK augebitur vel diminuetur in progressione Arithmetica, dum vires
CK in progressione Geometrica sumuntur. Dico igitur quod distantia corporis
ab ejus altitudine maxima sit ut excessus areæ AbNK supra aream DET.

Nam cum AK sit ut resistentia, id est ut APq. + 2BAP; assumatur data quævis
quantitas Z, & ponatur AK æqualis {APq. + 2BAP} ÷ Z; & (per hujus Lem. II.)
erit ipsius AK momentum KL æquale {2APQ + 2BA × PB} ÷ Z seu 2BPQ ÷ Z, &
areæ AbNK momentum KLON æquale 2BPQ × LO ÷ Z seu {BPQ × BD cub.} ÷ {2Z × CK
× AB}.

_Cas. 1._ Jam si corpus ascendit, sitque gravitas ut ABq. + BDq. existente
BET circulo, (_in Fig. Cas. 1. Prop. XIII._) linea AC, quæ gravitati
proportionalis est, erit {ABq. + BDq.} ÷ Z & DPq. seu APq. + 2BAP + ABq. +
BDq. erit AK × Z + AC × Z seu CK × Z; ideoque area DTV erit ad aream DPQ ut
DTq. vel DBq. ad CK × Z.

_Cas. 2._ Sin corpus ascendit, & gravitas sit ut ABq. - BDq. linea AC
(_Fig. Cas. 2. Prop. XIII._) erit {ABq. - BDq.} ÷ Z, & DTq. erit ad DPq. ut
DFq. seu DBq. ad BPq. - BDq. seu APq. + 2BAP + ABq. - BDq. id est ad AK × Z
+ AC × Z seu CK × Z. Ideoque area DTV erit ad aream DPQ ut DBq. ad CK × Z.

_Cas. 3._ Et eodem argumento, si corpus descendit, & propterea gravitas sit
ut BDq. - ABq. & linea AC (_Fig. Cas. 3. Prop. præced._) æquetur {BDq. -
ABq.} ÷ Z erit area DTV ad aream DPQ ut DBq. ad CK × Z: ut supra.

Cum igitur areæ illæ semper sint in hac ratione; si pro area DTV, qua
momentum temporis sibimet ipsi semper æquale exponitur, scribatur
determinatum quodvis rectangulum, puta BD × m, erit area DPQ, id est, ½BD ×
PQ; ad BD × m ut CK in Z ad BDq. Atq; inde fit PQ in BD cub. æquale 2BD × m
× CK × Z, & areæ AbNK momentum KLON superius inventum, fit BP × BD × m ÷
AB. Auferatur areæ DET momentum DTV seu BD × m, & restabit AP × BD × m ÷
AB. Est igitur differentia momentorum, id est, momentum differentiæ
arearum, æqualis AP × BD × m ÷ AB; & propterea (ob datum BD × m ÷ AB) ut
velocitas AP, id est ut momentum spatii quod corpus ascendendo vel
descendendo describit. Ideoque differentia arearum & spatium illud
proportionalibus momentis crescentia vel decrescentia, & simul incipientia
vel simul evanescentia, sunt proportionalia.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol._ Igitur si longitudo aliqua V sumatur in ea ratione ad arcum ET,
quam habet linea DA ad lineam DE; spatium quod corpus ascensu vel descensu
toto in Medio resistente describit, erit ad spatium quod in Medio non
resistente eodem tempore describere posset, ut arearum illarum differentia
ad BD × V^2 ÷ 4AB, ideoque ex dato tempore datur. Nam spatium in Medio non
resistente est in duplicata ratione temporis, sive ut V^2, & ob datas BD &
AB, ut BD × V^2 ÷ 4AB. Tempus autem est ut DET seu ½BD × ET, & harum
arearum momenta sunt ut BD × V ÷ 2AB ductum in momentum ipsius V & ½BD
ductum in momentum ipsius ET, id est, ut BD × V ÷ 2AB in DAq. × 2m ÷ DEq. &
½BD × 2m, sive ut {BD × V × DAq. × m} ÷ {AB × DEq.} & BD × m. Et propterea
momentum areæ V^2 est ad momentum differentiæ arearum DET & AKNb, ut {BD ×
V × DA × m} ÷ {AB × DE} ad AP × BD × m ÷ AB sive ut V × DA ÷ DE ad AP;
adeoque, ubi V & AP quam minimæ sunt, in ratione æqualitatis. Æqualis
igitur est area quam minima BD × V^2 ÷ 4AB differentiæ quam minimæ arearum
DET & AKNb. Unde cum spatia in Medio utroque, in principio descensus vel
fine ascensus simul descripta accedunt ad æqualitatem, adeoque tunc sunt ad
invicem ut area BD × V^2 ÷ 4AB & arearum DET & AKNb differentia; ob eorum
analoga incrementa necesse est ut in æqualibus quibuscunque temporibus sint
ad invicem ut area illa BD × V^2 ÷ 4AB & arearum DET & AKNb differentia.
_Q. E. D._

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. IV.

_De Corporum circulari Motu in Mediis resistentibus._

LEM. III.

    _Sit PQRr Spiralis quæ secet radios omnes SP, SQ, SR, &c. in æqualibus
    angulis. Agatur recta PT quæ tangat eandem in puncto quovis P, secetque
    radium SQ in T; & ad Spiralem erectis perpendiculis PO, QO
    concurrentibus in O, jungatur SO. Dico quod si puncta P & Q accedant ad
    invicem & coeant, angulus PSO evadet rectus, & ultima ratio rectanguli
    TQ × PS ad PQ quad. erit ratio æqualitatis._

[Illustration]

Etenim de angulis rectis OPQ, OQR subducantur anguli æquales SPQ, SQR, &
manebunt anguli æquales OPS, OQS. Ergo circulus qui transit per puncta O,
S, P transibit etiam per punctum Q. Coeant puncta P & Q, & hic circulus in
loco coitus PQ tanget Spiralem, adeoque perpendiculariter secabit rectam
OP. Fiet igitur OP diameter circuli hujus, & angulus OSP in semicirculo
rectus.   _Q. E. D._

Ad OP demittantur perpendicula QD, SE, & linearum rationes ultimæ erunt
hujusmodi: TQ ad PD ut TS vel PS ad PE, seu PO ad PS. Item PD ad PQ ut PQ
ad PO. Et ex æquo perturbate TQ ad PQ ut PQ ad PS. Unde fit PQq. æqualis TQ
× PS.   _Q. E. D._

Prop. XV. Theor. XI.

    _Si Medii densitas in locis singulis sit reciproce ut distantia locorum
    a centro immobili, sitque vis centripeta in duplicata ratione
    densitatis: dico quod corpus gyrari potest in Spirali, quæ radios omnes
    a centro illo ductos intersecat in angulo dato._

Ponantur quæ in superiore Lemmate, & producatur SQ ad V, ut sit SV æqualis
SP. Temporibus æqualibus describat corpus arcus quam minimos PQ & QR,
sintque areæ PSQ, QSr æquales. Et quoniam vis centripeta, qua corpus
urgetur in P est reciproce ut SPq. & (per Lem. X. Lib. I.) lineola TQ, quæ
vi illa generatur, est in ratione composita ex ratione hujus vis & ratione
duplicata temporis quo arcus PQ describitur, (Nam resistentiam in hoc casu,
ut infinite minorem quam vis centripeta negligo) erit TQ × SPq. id est (per
Lemma novissimum) PQq. × SP, in ratione duplicata temporis, adeoque tempus
est ut PQ × [sqrt]SP, & corporis velocitas qua arcus PQ illo tempore
describitur ut PQ ÷ {PQ × [sqrt]SP} seu 1 ÷ [sqrt]SP, hoc est in dimidiata
ratione ipsius SP reciproce. Et simili argumento velocitas, qua arcus QR
describitur, est in dimidiata ratione ipsius SQ reciproce. Sunt autem arcus
illi PQ & QR ut velocitates descriptrices ad invicem, id est in dimidiata
ratione SQ ad SP, sive ut SQ ad [sqrt]SP × [sqrt]SQ; & ob æquales angulos
SPQ, SQr & æquales areas PSQ, QSr, est arcus PQ ad arcum Qr ut SQ ad SP.
Sumantur proportionalium consequentium differentiæ, & fiet arcus PQ ad
arcum Rr ut SQ ad SP - SP^½ × SQ^½, seu ½VQ; nam punctis P & Q coeuntibus,
ratio ultima SP - SP^½ × SQ^½ ad ½VQ fit æqualitatis. In Medio non
resistente areæ æquales PSQ, QSr (Theor. I. Lib. I.) temporibus æqualibus
describi deberent. Ex resistentia oritur arearum differentia RSr, &
propterea resistentia est ut lineolæ Qr decrementum Rr collatum cum
quadrato temporis quo generatur. Nam lineola Rr (per Lem. X. Lib. I.) est
in duplicata ratione temporis. Est igitur resistentia ut Rr ÷ {PQq. × SP}.
Erat autem PQ ad Rr ut SQ ad ½VQ, & inde Rr ÷ {PQq. × SP} fit ut ½VQ ÷ {PQ
× SP × SQ} sive ut ½OS ÷ {OP × SPq.}. Namque punctis P & Q coeuntibus, SP &
SQ coincidunt; & ob similia triangula PVQ, PSO, fit PQ ad ½VQ ut OP ad ½OS.
Est igitur OS ÷ {OP × SPq.} ut resistentia, id est in ratione densitatis
Medii in P & ratione duplicata velocitatis conjunctim. Auferatur duplicata
ratio velocitatis, nempe ratio 1 ÷ SP, & manebit Medii densitas in P ut OS
÷ {OP × SP}. Detur Spiralis, & ob datam rationem OS ad OP, densitas Medii
in P erit ut 1 ÷ SP. In Medio igitur cujus densitas est reciproce ut
distantia a centro SP, corpus gyrari potest in hac Spirali.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Velocitas in loco quovis P ea semper est quacum corpus in Medio
non resistente gyrari potest in circulo, ad eandem a centro distantiam SP.

_Corol. 2._ Medii densitas, si datur distantia SP, est ut OS ÷ OP, sin
distantia illa non datur, ut OS ÷ {OP × SP}. Et inde Spiralis ad quamlibet
Medii densitatem aptari potest.

_Corol. 3._ Vis resistentiæ in loco quovis P, est ad vim centripetam in
eodem loco ut ½OS ad OP. Nam vires illæ sunt ut lineæ Rr & TQ seu ut ½VQ ×
PQ ÷ SQ & PQq. ÷ SP quas simul generant, hoc est, ut ½VQ & PQ, seu ½OS &
OP. Data igitur Spirali datur proportio resistentiæ ad vim centripetam, &
viceversa ex data illa proportione datur Spiralis.

_Corol. 4._ Corpus itaque gyrari nequit in hac spirali, nisi ubi vis
resistentiæ minor est quam dimidium vis centripetæ. Fiat resistentia
æqualis dimidio vis centripetæ & Spiralis conveniet cum linea recta PS,
inque hac recta corpus descendet ad centrum, dimidia semper cum velocitate
qua probavimus in superioribus in casu Parabolæ (Theor. X. Lib. I.)
descensum in Medio non resistente fieri. Unde tempora descensus hic erunt
dupla majora temporibus illis atque adeo dantur.

_Corol. 5._ Et quoniam in æqualibus a centro distantiis velocitas eadem est
in Spirali PQR atque in recta SP, & longitudo Spiralis ad longitudinem
rectæ PS est in data ratione, nempe in ratione OP ad OS; tempus descensus
in Spirali erit ad tempus descensus in recta SP in eadem illa data ratione,
proindeque datur.

_Corol. 6._ Si centro S intervallis duobus describantur duo circuli;
numerus revolutionum quas corpus intra circulorum circumferentias complere
potest, est ut PS ÷ OS, sive ut Tangens anguli quem Spiralis continet cum
radio PS; tempus vero revolutionum earundem ut OP ÷ OS, id est reciproce ut
Medii densitas.

[Illustration]

_Corol. 7._ Si corpus, in Medio cujus densitas est reciproce ut distantia
locorum a centro, revolutionem in Curva quacunque AEB circa centrum illud
fecerit, & Radium primum AS in eodem angulo secuerit in B quo prius in A,
idque cum velocitate quæ fuerit ad velocitatem suam primam in A reciproce
in dimidiata ratione distantiarum a centro (id est ut BS ad mediam
proportionalem inter AS & CS:) corpus illud perget innumeras consimiles
revolutiones BFC, CGD, &c. facere, & intersectionibus distinguet Radium AS
in partes AS, BS, CS, DS &c. continue proportionales. Revolutionum vero
tempora erunt ut Perimetri orbitarum AEB, BFC, CGD &c. directe, &
velocitates in principiis A, B, C, inverse; id est ut AS^½, BS^½, CS^½.
Atq; tempus totum, quo corpus perveniet ad centrum, erit ad tempus
revolutionis primæ, ut summa omnium continue proportionalium AS^½, BS^½,
CS^½ pergentium in infinitum, ad terminum primum AS^½; id est ut terminus
ille primus AS^½ ad differentiam duorum primorum AS^½ - BS^½, & quam
proxime ut 2/3AS ad AB. Unde tempus illud totum expedite invenitur.

_Corol. 8._ Ex his etiam præterpropter colligere licet motus corporum in
Mediis, quorum densitas aut uniformis est, aut aliam quamcunque legem
assignatam observat. Centro S intervallis continue proportionalibus SA, SB,
SC &c. describe circulos quotcunque, & statue numerum revolutionum inter
perimetros duorum quorumvis ex his circulis, in Medio de quo egimus, esse
ad numerum revolutionum inter eosdem in Medio proposito, ut Medii propositi
densitas mediocris inter hos circulos ad Medii, de quo egimus, densitatem
mediocrem inter eosdem quam proxime; Sed & in eadem quoq; ratione esse
Tangentem anguli quo Spiralis præfinita, in Medio de quo egimus, secat
radium AS, ad tangentem anguli quo Spiralis nova secat radium eundem in
Medio proposito: Atq; etiam ut sunt eorundem angulorum secantes ita esse
tempora revolutionum omnium inter circulos eosdem duos quam proxime. Si hæc
fiant passim inter circulos binos, continuabitur motus per circulos omnes.
Atque hoc pacto haud difficulter imaginari possimus quibus modis ac
temporibus corpora in Medio quocunque regulari gyrari debebunt.

_Corol. 9._ Et quamvis motus excentrici in Spiralibus ad formam Ovalium
accedentibus peragantur; tamen concipiendo Spiralium illarum singulas
revolutiones eisdem ab invicem intervallis distare, iisdemque gradibus ad
centrum accedere cum Spirali superius descripta, intelligemus etiam quomodo
motus corporum in hujusmodi Spiralibus peragantur.

Prop. XVI. Theor. XII.

    _Si Medii densitas in locis singulis sit reciproce ut dignitas aliqua
    distantiæ locorum a centro, sitque vis centripeta reciproce ut
    distantia in dignitatem illam ducta: dico quod corpus gyrari potest in
    Spirali, quæ radios omnes a centro illo ductos intersecat in angulo
    dato._

Demonstratur eadem methodo cum Propositione superiore. Nam si vis
centripeta in P sit reciproce ut distantiæ SP dignitas quælibet SP^{n + 1}
cujus index est n + 1; colligetur ut supra, quod tempus quo corpus
describit arcum quemvis PQ erit ut PQ × SP^{½n} & resistentia in P ut Rr ÷
{PQq. × SP^n} sive ut ½nVQ ÷ {PQ × SP^n × SQ}, adeoque ut ½OS ÷ {OP × SP^{n
+ 1}}. Et propterea densitas in P est reciproce ut SP^n.

_Scholium._

Cæterum hæc Propositio & superiores, quæ ad Media inæqualiter densa
spectant, intelligendæ sunt de motu corporum adeo parvorum, ut Medii ex uno
corporis latere major densitas quam ex altero non consideranda veniat.
Resistentiam quoque cæteris paribus densitati proportionalem esse suppono.
Unde in Mediis quorum vis resistendi non est ut densitas, debet densitas eo
usque augeri vel diminui, ut resistentiæ vel tollatur excessus vel defectus
suppleatur.

Prop. XVII. Prob. V.

_Invenire & vim centripetam & Medii resistentiam qua corpus in data Spirali
data lege revolvi potest._ Vide _Fig. Prop. XV._

Sit spiralis illa PQR. Ex velocitate qua corpus percurrit arcum quam
minimum PQ dabitur tempus, & ex altitudine TQ, quæ est ut vis centripeta &
quadratum temporis dabitur vis. Deinde ex arearum, æqualibus temporum
particulis confectarum PSQ & QSR, differentia RSr, dabitur corporis
retardatio, & ex retardatione invenietur resistentia ac densitas Medii.

Prop. XVIII. Prob. VI.

    _Data lege vis centripetæ, invenire Medii densitatem in locis singulis,
    qua corpus datam Spiralem describet._

Ex vi centripeta invenienda est velocitas in locis singulis, deinde ex
velocitatis retardatione quærenda Medii densitas: ut in Propositione
superiore.

Methodum vero tractandi hæc Problemata aperui in hujus Propositione decima,
& Lemmate secundo; & Lectorem in hujusmodi perplexis disquisitionibus
diutius detenere nolo. Addenda jam sunt aliqua de viribus corporum ad
progrediendum, deque densitate & resistentia Mediorum, in quibus motus
hactenus expositi & his affines peraguntur.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. V.

_De Densitate & compressione Fluidorum, deque Hydrostatica._

Definitio Fluidi.

Fluidum est corpus omne cujus partes cedunt vi cuicunque illatæ, & cedendo
facile movetur inter se.

Prop. XIX. Theor. XIII.

    _Fluidi homogenei & immoti, quod in vase quocunque immoto clauditur &
    undique comprimitur, partes omnes (seposita Condensationis, gravitatis
    & virium omnium centripetarum consideratione) æqualiter premuntur
    undique, & absque omni motu a pressione illa orto permanent in locis
    suis._

[Illustration]

_Cas. 1._ In vase sphærico ABC claudatur & uniformiter comprimatur fluidum
undique: dico quod ejusdem pars nulla ex illa pressione movebitur. Nam si
pars aliqua D moveatur, necesse est ut omnes ejusmodi partes, ad eandem a
centro distantiam undique consistentes, simili motu simul moveantur; atq;
hoc adeo quia similis & æqualis est omnium pressio, & motus omnis exclusus
supponitur, nisi qui a pressione illa oriatur. Atqui non possunt omnes ad
centrum propius accedere, nisi fluidum ad centrum condensetur; contra
Hypothesin. Non possunt longius ab eo recedere nisi fluidum ad
circumferentiam condensetur; etiam contra Hypothesin. Non possunt servata
sua a centro distantia moveri in plagam quamcunq; quia pari ratione
movebuntur in plagam contrariam; in plagas autem contrarias non potest pars
eadem eodem tempore moveri. Ergo fluidi pars nulla de loco suo movebitur.
_Q. E. D._

_Cas. 2._ Dico jam quod fluidi hujus partes omnes sphæricæ æqualiter
premuntur undique: sit enim EF pars sphærica fluidi, & si hæc undiq; non
premitur æqualiter, augeatur pressio minor, usq; dum ipsa undiq; prematur
æqualiter; & partes ejus, per casum primum, permanebunt in locis suis. Sed
ante auctam pressionem permanebunt in locis suis, per casum eundum primum,
& additione pressionis novæ movebuntur de locis suis, per definitionem
Fluidi. Quæ duo repugnant. Ergo falso dicebatur quod Sphæra EF non undique
premebatur æqualiter.   _Q. E. D._

_Cas. 3._ Dico præterea quod diversarum partium sphæricarum æqualis sit
pressio. Nam partes sphæricæ contiguæ se mutuo premunt æqualiter in puncto
contactus, per motus Legem III. Sed & per Casum secundum, undiq; premuntur
eadem vi. Partes igitur duæ quævis sphæricæ non contiguæ, quia pars
sphærica intermedia tangere potest utramque, prementur eadem vi.
_Q. E. D._

_Cas. 4._ Dico jam quod fluidi partes omnes ubiq; premuntur æqualiter. Nam
partes duæ quævis tangi possunt a partibus Sphæricis in punctis
quibuscunque, & ibi partes illas Sphæricas æqualiter premunt, per Casum 3.
& vicissim ab illis æqualiter premuntur, per Motus Legem Tertiam.
_Q. E. D._

_Cas. 5._ Cum igitur fluidi pars quælibet GHI in fluido reliquo tanquam in
vase claudatur, & undique prematur æqualiter, partes autem ejus se mutuo
æqualiter premant & quiescant inter se; manifestum est quod Fluidi
cujuscunque GHI, quod undique premitur æqualiter, partes omnes se mutuo
premunt æqualiter, & quiescunt inter se.   _Q. E. D._

_Cas. 6._ Igitur si Fluidum illud in vase non rigido claudatur, & undique
non prematur æqualiter, cedet idem pressioni fortiori, per Definitionem
Fluiditatis.

_Cas. 7._ Ideoque in vase rigido Fluidum non sustinebit pressionem
fortiorem ex uno latere quam ex alio, sed eidem cedet, idq; in momento
temporis, quia latus vasis rigidum non persequitur liquorem cedentem.
Cedendo autem urgebit latus oppositum, & sic pressio undique ad æqualitatem
verget. Et quoniam Fluidum, quam primum a parte magis pressa recedere
conatur, inhibetur per resistentiam vasis ad latus oppositum; reducetur
pressio undique ad æqualitatem in momento temporis absque motu locali; &
subinde, partes fluidi, per Casum quintum, se mutuo prement æqualiter, &
quiescent inter se.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol._ Unde nec motus partium fluidi inter se, per pressionem fluido
ubivis in externa superficie illatam, mutari possunt nisi, quatenus aut
figura superficiei alicubi mutatur, aut omnes fluidi partes intensius vel
remissius sese premendo difficilius vel facilius labuntur inter se.

Prop. XX. Theor. XIV.

    _Si Fluidi Sphærici, & in æqualibus a centro distantiis homogenei,
    fundo sphærico concentrico incumbentis partes singulæ versus centrum
    totius gravitent; sustinet fundum pondus Cylindri, cujus basis æqualis
    est superficiei fundi, & altitudo eadem quæ Fluidi incumbentis._

[Illustration]

Sit DHM superficies fundi, & AEI superficies superior fluidi. Superficiebus
sphæricis innumeris BFK, CGL distinguatur fluidum in Orbes concentricos
æqualiter crassos; & concipe vim gravitatis agere solummodo in superficiem
superiorem Orbis cujusque, & æquales esse actiones in æquales partes
superficierum omnium. Premitur ergo superficies suprema AE vi simplici
gravitatis propriæ, qua & omnes Orbis supremi partes & superficies secunda
BFK (per Prop. XIX.) premuntur. Premitur præterea superficies secunda BFK
vi propriæ gravitatis, quæ addita vi priori facit pressionem duplam. Hac
pressione & insuper vi propriæ gravitatis, id est pressione tripla, urgetur
superficies tertia CGL. Et similiter pressione quadrupla urgetur
superficies quarta, quintupla quinta & sic deinceps. Pressio igitur qua
superficies unaquæque urgetur, non est ut quantitas solida fluidi
incumbentis, sed ut numerus Orbium ad usque summitatem fluidi; & æquatur
gravitati Orbis infimi multiplicatæ per numerum Orbium: hoc est gravitati
solidi cujus ultima ratio ad Cylindrum præfinitum, (si modo Orbium augeatur
numerus & minuatur crassitudo in infinitum, sic ut actio gravitatis a
superficie infima ad supremam continua reddatur) fiet ratio æqualitatis.
Sustinet ergo superficies infima pondus cylindri præfiniti.   _Q. E. D._
Et simili argumentatione patet Propositio, ubi gravitas decrescit in
ratione quavis assignata distantiæ a centro, ut & ubi Fluidum sursum rarius
est, deorsum densius.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Igitur fundum non urgetur a toto fluidi incumbentis pondere,
sed eam solummodo ponderis partem sustinet quæ in Propositione describitur;
pondere reliquo a fluidi figura fornicata sustentato.

_Corol. 2._ In æqualibus autem a centro distantiis eadem semper est
pressionis quantitas, sive superficies pressa sit Horizonti parallela vel
perpendicularis vel obliqua; sive fluidum a superficie pressa sursum
continuatum surgat perpendiculariter secundum lineam rectam, vel serpit
oblique per tortas cavitates & canales, easque regulares vel maxime
irregulares, amplas vel angustissimas. Hisce circumstantiis pressionem nil
mutari colligitur, applicando demonstrationem Theorematis hujus ad Casus
singulos Fluidorum.

_Corol. 3._ Eadem Demonstratione colligitur etiam (per Prop. XIX.) quod
fluidi gravis partes nullum, ex pressione ponderis incumbentis, acquirunt
motum inter se, si modo excludatur motus qui ex condensatione oriatur.

_Corol. 4._ Et propterea si aliud ejusdem gravitatis specificæ corpus, quod
sit condensationis expers, submergatur in hoc fluido, id ex pressione
ponderis incumbentis nullum acquiret motum: non descendet, non ascendet,
non cogetur figuram suam mutare. Si Sphæricum est manebit sphæricum, non
obstante pressione; si quadratum est manebit quadratum: idq; sive molle
sit, sive fluidissimum; sive fluido libere innatet, sive fundo incumbat.
Habet enim fluidi pars quælibet interna rationem corporis submersi, & par
est ratio omnium ejusdem magnitudinis, figuræ & gravitatis specificæ
submersorum corporum. Si corpus submersum servato pondere liquesceret &
indueret formam fluidi; hoc, si prius ascenderet vel descenderet vel ex
pressione figuram novam indueret, etiam nunc ascenderet vel descenderet vel
figuram novam induere cogeretur: id adeo quia gravitas ejus cæteræque
motuum causæ permanent. Atqui, per Cas. 5. Prop. XIX. jam quiesceret &
figuram retineret. Ergo & prius.

_Corol. 5._ Proinde corpus quod specifice gravius est quam Fluidum sibi
contiguum subsidebit, & quod specifice levius est ascendet, motumque &
figuræ mutationem consequetur, quantum excessus ille vel defectus
gravitatis efficere possit. Namque excessus ille vel defectus rationem
habet impulsus, quo corpus, alias in æquilibrio cum fluidi partibus
constitutum, urgetur; & comparari potest cum excessu vel defectu ponderis
in lance alterutra libræ.

_Corol. 6._ Corporum igitur in fluidis constitutorum duplex est Gravitas:
altera vera & absoluta, altera apparens, vulgaris & comparativa. Gravitas
absoluta est vis tota qua corpus deorsum tendit: relativa & vulgaris est
excessus gravitatis quo corpus magis tendit deorsum quam fluidum ambiens.
Prioris generis Gravitate partes fluidorum & corporum omnium gravitant in
locis suis: ideoque conjunctis ponderibus componunt pondus totius. Nam
totum omne grave est, ut in vasis liquorum plenis experiri licet; & pondus
totius æquale est ponderibus omnium partium, ideoque ex iisdem componitur.
Alterius generis gravitate corpora non gravitant in locis suis, id est
inter se collata non prægravant, sed mutuos ad descendendum conatus
impedientia permanent in locis suis, perinde ac si gravia non essent. Quæ
in Aere sunt & non prægravant, Vulgus gravia non judicat. Quæ prægravant
vulgus gravia judicat, quatenus ab Aeris pondere non sustinentur. Pondera
vulgi nihil aliud sunt quam excessus verorum ponderum supra pondus Aeris.
Unde & vulgo dicuntur levia, quæ sunt minus gravia, Aerique prægravanti
cedendo superiora petunt. Comparative levia sunt non vere, quia descendunt
in vacuo. Sic & in Aqua, corpora, quæ ob majorem vel minorem gravitatem
descendunt vel ascendunt, sunt comparative & apparenter gravia vel levia, &
eorum gravitas vel levitas comparativa & apparens est excessus vel defectus
quo vera eorum gravitas vel superat gravitatem aquæ vel ab ea superatur.
Quæ vero nec prægravando descendunt, nec prægravanti cedendo ascendunt,
etiamsi veris suis ponderibus adaugeant pondus totius, comparative tamen &
in sensu vulgi non gravitant in aqua. Nam similis est horum Casuum
Demonstratio.

_Corol. 7._ Quæ de gravitate demonstrantur, obtinent in aliis quibuscunque
viribus centripetis.

_Corol. 8._ Proinde si Medium, in quo corpus aliquod movetur, urgeatur vel
a gravitate propria, vel ab alia quacunq; vi centripeta, & corpus ab eadem
vi urgeatur fortius: differentia virium est vis illa motrix, quam in
præcedentibus Propositionibus ut vim centripetam consideravimus. Sin corpus
a vi illa urgeatur levius, differentia virium pro vi centrifuga haberi
debet.

_Corol. 9._ Cum autem fluida premendo corpora inclusa non mutent eorum
Figuras externas, patet insuper, per Corollaria Prop. XIX. quod non
mutabunt situm partium internarum inter se: proindeque, si Animalia
immergantur, & sensatio omnis a motu partium oriatur; nec lædent corporibus
immersis, nec sensationem ullam excitabunt, nisi quatenus hæc corpora a
compressione ne condensari possunt. Et par est ratio cujuscunque corporum
Systematis fluido comprimente circundati. Systematis partes omnes iisdem
agitabuntur motibus, ac si in vacuo constituerentur, ac solam retinerent
gravitatem suam comparativam, nisi quatenus fluidum vel motibus earum
nonnihil resistat, vel ad easdem compressione conglutinandas requiratur.

Prop. XXI. Theor. XV.

    _Sit Fluidi cujusdam densitas compressioni proportionalis, & partes
    ejus a vi centripeta distantiis suis a centro reciproce proportionali
    deorsum trahantur: dico quod si distantiæ illæ sumantur continue
    proportionales, densitates fluidi in iisdem distantiis erunt etiam
    continue proportionales._

[Illustration]

Designet ATV fundum Sphæricum cui fluidum incumbit, S centrum, SA, SB, SC,
SD, SE, &c. distantias continue proportionales. Erigantur perpendicula AH,
BI, CK, DL, EM, &c. quæ sint ut densitates Medii in locis A, B, C, D, E; &
specificæ gravitates in iisdem locis erunt ut AH ÷ AS, BI ÷ BS, CK ÷ CS,
&c. vel, quod perinde est, ut AH ÷ AB, BI ÷ BC, CK ÷ CD &c. Finge primum
has gravitates uniformiter continuari ab A ad B, a B ad C, a C ad D &c.
factis per gradus decrementis in punctis B, C, D &c. Et hæ gravitates ductæ
in altitudines AB, BC, CD &c. conficient pressiones AH, BI, CK, quibus
fundum ATV (juxta Theorema XIV.) urgetur. Sustinet ergo particula A
pressiones omnes AH, BI, CK, DL, pergendo in infinitum; & particula B
pressiones omnes præter primam AH; & particula C omnes præter duas primas
AH, BI; & sic deinceps: adeoque particulæ primæ A densitas AH est ad
particulæ secundæ B densitatem BI ut summa omnium AH + BI + CK + DL, in
infinitum, ad summam omnium BI + CK + DL, &c. Et BI densitas secundæ B, est
ad CK densitatem tertiæ C, ut summa omnium BI + CK + DL, &c. ad summam
omnium CK + DL, &c. Sunt igitur summæ illæ differentiis suis AH, BI, CK,
&c. proportionales, atque adeo continue proportionales per hujus Lem. I.
proindeq; differentiæ AH, BI, CK, &c. summis proportionales, sunt etiam
continue proportionales. Quare cum densitates in locis A, B, C sint ut AH,
BI, CK, &c. erunt etiam hæ continue proportionales. Pergatur per saltum, &
(ex æquo) in distantiis SA, SC, SE continue proportionalibus, erunt
densitates AH, CK, EM continue proportionales. Et eodem argumento in
distantiis quibusvis continue proportionalibus SA, SD, SQ densitates AH,
DL, QT erunt continue proportionales. Coeant jam puncta A, B, C, D, E, &c.
eo ut progressio gravitatum specificarum a fundo A ad summitatem Fluidi
continua reddatur, & in distantiis quibusvis continue proportionalibus SA,
SD, SQ, densitates AH, DL, QT, semper existentes continue proportionales,
manebunt etiamnum continue proportionales.   _Q. E. D._

[Illustration]

_Corol._ Hinc si detur densitas Fluidi in duobus locis, puta A & E, colligi
potest ejus densitas in alio quovis loco Q. Centro S, Asymptotis
rectangulis SQ, SX describatur Hyperbola secans perpendicula AH, EM, QT in
a, e, q, ut & perpendicula HX, MY, TZ ad asymptoton SX demissa in h, m, &
t. Fiat area ZYmtZ ad aream datam YmhX ut area data EeqQ ad aream datam
EeaA; & linea Zt producta abscindet lineam QT densitati proportionalem.
Namque si lineæ SA, SE, SQ sunt continue proportionales, erunt areæ EeqQ,
EeaA æquales, & inde areæ his proportionales YmtZ, XhmY etiam æquales &
lineæ SX, SY, SZ id est AH, EM, QT continue proportionales, ut oportet. Et
si lineæ SA, SE, SQ obtinent alium quemvis ordinem in serie continue
proportionalium, lineæ AH, EM, QT, ob proportionales areas Hyperbolicas,
obtinebunt eundem ordinem in alia serie quantitatum continue
proportionalium.

Prop. XXII. Theor. XVI.

    _Sit Fluidi cujusdam densitas compressioni proportionalis, & partes
    ejus a gravitate quadratis distantiarum suarum a centro reciproce
    proportionali deorsum trahantur: dico quod si distantiæ sumantur in
    progressione Musica, densitates Fluidi in his distantiis erunt in
    progressione Geometrica._

[Illustration]

Designet S centrum, & SA, SB, SC, SD, SE distantias in Progressione
Geometrica. Erigantur perpendicula AH, BI, CK, &c. quæ sint ut Fluidi
densitates in locis A, B, C, D, E, &c. & ipsius gravitates specificæ in
iisdem locis erunt AH ÷ SAq., BI ÷ SBq., CK ÷ SCq., &c. Finge has
gravitates uniformiter continuari, primam ab A ad B, secundam a B ad C,
tertiam a C ad D, &c. Et hæ ductæ in altitudines AB, BC, CD, DE, &c. vel,
quod perinde est, in distantias SA, SB, SC, &c. altitudinibus illis
proportionales, conficient exponentes pressionum AH ÷ SA, BI ÷ SB, CK ÷ SC,
&c. Quare cum densitates sint ut harum pressionum summæ, differentiæ
densitatum AH - BI, BI - CK, &c. erunt ut summarum differentiæ AH ÷ SA, BI
÷ SB, CK ÷ SC, &c. Centro S Asymptotis SA, SX describatur Hyperbola quævis,
quæ secet perpendicula AH, BI, CK, &c. in a, b, c; ut & perpendicula ad
Asymptoton SX demissa Ht, Iu, Kw in h, i, k; & densitatum differentiæ tu,
uw, &c. erunt ut AH ÷ SA, BI ÷ SB, &c. Et rectangula tu × th, uw × ui, &c.
seu tp, uq, &c. ut AH × th ÷ SA ut BI × ui ÷ SB, &c. id est ut Aa, Bb &c.
Est enim ex natura Hyperbolæ SA ad AH vel St, ut th ad Aa, adeoque AH × th
÷ SA æquale Aa. Et simili argumento est BI × ui ÷ SB æqualis Bb, &c. Sunt
autem Aa, Bb, Cc, &c. continue proportionales, & propterea differentiis
suis Aa - Bb, Bb - Cc, &c. proportionales; ideoque differentiis hisce
proportionalia sunt rectangula tp, uq, &c. ut & summis differentiarum Aa -
Cc vel Aa - Dd summæ rectangulorum tp + uq, vel tp + uq + wr. Sunto
ejusmodi termini quam plurimi, & summa omnium differentiarum, puta Aa - Ff,
erit summæ omnium rectangulorum, puta zthn, proportionalis. Augeatur
numerus terminorum & minuantur distantiæ punctorum A, B, C, &c. in
infinitum, & rectangula illa evadent æqualia areæ Hyperbolicæ zthn, adeoque
huic areæ proportionalis est differentia Aa - Ff. Sumantur jam distantiæ
quælibet, puta SA, SD, SF in Progressione Musica, & differentiæ Aa - Dd, Dd
- Ff erunt æquales; & propterea differentiis hisce proportionales areæ
thlx, xlnz æquales erunt inter se, & densitates St, Sx, Sz, id est AH, DL,
FN, continue proportionales.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol._ Hinc si dentur Fluidi densitates duæ quævis, puta AH & CK, dabitur
area thkw harum differentiæ tw respondens; & inde invenietur densitas FN in
altitudine quacunque SF, sumendo aream thnz ad aream illam datam thkw ut
est differentia Aa - Ff ad differentiam Aa - Cc.

_Scholium._

Simili argumentatione probari potest, quod si gravitas particularum Fluidi
diminuatur in triplicata ratione distantiarum a centro; & quadratorum
distantiarum SA, SB, SC, &c. reciproca (nempe SA cub. ÷ SAq., SA cub. ÷
SBq., SA cub. ÷ SCq.) sumantur in progressione Arithmetica; densitates AH,
BI, CK, &c. erunt in progressione Geometrica. Et si gravitas diminuatur in
quadruplicata ratione distantiarum, & cuborum distantiarum reciproca (puta
SA qq. ÷ SA cub., SA qq. ÷ SB cub., SA qq. ÷ SC cub.) sumantur in
progressione Arithmetica; densitates AH, BI, CK, &c. erunt in progressione
Geometrica. Et sic in infinitum. Rursus si gravitas particularum Fluidi in
omnibus distantiis eadem sit, & distantiæ sint in progressione Arithmetica,
densitates erunt in progressione Geometrica, uti Vir Cl.\ _Edmundus
Halleius_ invenit. Si gravitas sit ut distantia, & quadrata distantiarum
sint in progressione Arithmetica, densitates erunt in progressione
Geometrica. Et sic in infinitum. Hæc ita se habent ubi Fluidi compressione
condensati densitas est ut vis compressionis, vel, quod perinde est,
spatium a Fluido occupatum reciproce ut hæc vis. Fingi possunt aliæ
condensationis leges, ut quod cubus vis comprimentis sit ut
quadrato-quadratum densitatis, seu triplicata ratio Vis æqualis
quadruplicatæ rationi densitatis. Quo in casu, si gravitas est reciproce ut
quadratum distantiæ a centro, densitas erit reciproce ut cubus distantiæ.
Fingatur quod cubus vis comprimentis sit ut quadrato-cubus densitatis, & si
gravitas est reciproce ut quadratum distantiæ, densitas erit reciproce in
sesquiplicata ratione distantiæ. Fingatur quod vis comprimens sit in
duplicata ratione densitatis, & gravitas reciproce in ratione duplicata
distantiæ, & densitas erit reciproce ut distantia. Casus omnes percurrere
longum esset.

Prop. XXIII. Theor. XVII.

    _Particulæ viribus quæ sunt reciproce proportionales distantiis
    centrorum suorum se mutuo fugientes componunt Fluidum Elasticum, cujus
    densitas est compressioni proportionalis. Et vice versa, si Fluidi ex
    particulis se mutuo fugientibus compositi densitas sit ut compressio,
    vires centrifugæ particularum sunt reciproce proportionales distantiis
    centrorum._

[Illustration]

Includi intelligatur Fluidum in spatio cubico ACE, dein compressione redigi
in spatium cubicum minus ace; & particularum similem situm inter se in
utroque spatio obtinentium distantiæ erunt ut cuborum latera AB, ab; &
Medii densitates reciproce ut spatia continentia AB cub. & ab cub. In
latere cubi majoris ABCD capiatur quadratum DP æquale lateri cubi minoris
db; & ex Hypothesi, pressio qua quadratum DP urget Fluidum inclusum, erit
ad pressionem qua latus illud quadratum db urget Fluidum inclusum, ut Medii
densitates ad invicem, hoc est ab cub. ad AB cub. Sed pressio qua quadratum
DB urget Fluidum inclusum, est ad pressionem qua quadratum DP urget idem
Fluidum, ut quadratum DB ad quadratum DP, hoc est ut AB quad. ad ab quad.
Ergo ex æquo pressio qua latus DB urget Fluidum, est ad pressionem qua
latus db urget Fluidum, ut ab ad AB. Planis FGH, fgh per media cuborum
ductis distinguatur Fluidum in duas partes, & hæ se mutuo prement iisdem
viribus, quibus premuntur a planis AC, ac, hoc est in proportione ab ad AB:
adeoque vires centrifugæ, quibus hæ pressiones sustinentur, sunt in eadem
ratione. Ob eundem particularum numerum similemq; situm in utroque cubo,
vires quas particulæ omnes secundum plana FGH, fgh exercent in omnes, sunt
ut vires quas singulæ exercent in singulas. Ergo vires, quas singulæ
exercent in singulas secundum planum FGH in cubo majore, sunt ad vires quas
singulæ exercent in singulas secundum planum fgh in cubo minore ut ab ad
AB, hoc est reciproce ut distantiæ particularum ad invicem.   _Q. E. D._

Et vice versa, si vires particularum singularum sunt reciproce ut
distantiæ, id est reciproce ut cuborum latera AB, ab; summæ virium erunt in
eadem ratione, & pressiones laterum DB, db ut summæ virium; & pressio
quadrati DP ad pressionem lateris DB ut ab quad. ad AB quad. Et ex æquo
pressio quadrati DP ad pressionem lateris db ut ab cub. ad AB cub. id est
vis compressionis ad vim compressionis ut densitas ad densitatem.
_Q. E. D._

_Scholium._

Simili argumento si particularum vires centrifugæ sint reciproce in
duplicata ratione distantiarum inter centra, cubi virium comprimentium
erunt ut quadrato-quadrata densitatum. Si vires centrifugæ sint reciproce
in triplicata vel quadruplicata ratione distantiarum, cubi virium
comprimentium erunt ut quadrato-cubi vel cubo-cubi densitatum. Et
universaliter, si D ponatur pro distantia, & E pro densitate Fluidi
compressi, & vires centrifugæ sint reciproce ut distantiæ dignitas quælibet
Dn, cujus index est numerus n; vires comprimentes erunt ut latera cubica
Dignitatis E^{n + 2}, cujus index est numerus n + 2; & contra. Intelligenda
vero sunt hæc omnia de particularum Viribus centrifugis quæ terminantur in
particulis proximis, aut non longe ultra diffunduntur. Exemplum habemus in
corporibus Magneticis. Horum Virtus attractiva terminatur fere in sui
generis corporibus sibi proximis. Magnetis virtus per interpositam laminam
ferri contrahitur, & in lamina fere terminatur. Nam corpora ulteriora non
tam a Magnete quam a lamina trahuntur. Ad eundem modum si particulæ fugant
alias sui generis particulas sibi proximas, in particulas autem remotiores
virtutem nullam nisi forte per particulas intermedias virtute illa auctas
exerceant, ex hujusmodi particulis componentur Fluida de quibus actum est
in hac propositione. Quod si particulæ cujusq; virtus in infinitum
propagetur, opus erit vi majori ad æqualem condensationem majoris
quantitatis Fluidi. Ut si particula unaquæq; vi sua, quæ sit reciproce ut
distantia locorum a centro suo, fugat alias omnes particulas in infinitum;
Vires quibus Fluidum in vasis similibus æqualiter comprimi & condensari
possit, erunt ut quadrata diametrorum vasorum: ideoque vis, qua Fluidum in
eodem vase comprimitur, erit reciproce ut latus cubicum quadrato-cubi
densitatis. An vero Fluida Elastica ex particulis se mutuo fugantibus
constent, Quæstio Physica est. Nos proprietatem Fluidorum ex ejusmodi
particulis constantium Mathematice demonstravimus, ut Philosophis ansam
præbeamus Quæstionem illam tractandi.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. VI.

_De Motu & resistentia Corporum Funependulorum._

Prop. XXIV. Theor. XVIII.

    _Quantitates materiæ in corporibus funependulis, quorum centra
    oscillationum a centro suspensionis æqualiter distant, sunt in ratione
    composita ex ratione ponderum & ratione duplicata temporum
    oscillationum in vacuo._

Nam velocitas, quam data vis in data materia dato tempore generare potest,
est ut vis & tempus directe, & materia inverse. Quo major est vis vel majus
tempus vel minor materia, eo major generabitur velocitas. Id quod per motus
Legem secundam manifestum est. Jam vero si pendula ejusdem sint
longitudinis, vires motrices in locis a perpendiculo æqualiter distantibus
sunt ut pondera: ideoque si corpora duo oscillando describant arcus
æquales, & arcus illi dividantur in partes æquales; cum tempora quibus
corpora describant singulas arcuum partes correspondentes sint ut tempora
oscillationum totarum, erunt velocitates ad invicem in correspondentibus
oscillationum partibus, ut vires motrices & tota oscillationum tempora
directe & quantitates materiæ reciproce: adeoque quantitates materiæ ut
vires & oscillationum tempora directe & velocitates reciproce. Sed
velocitates reciproce sunt ut tempora, atque adeo tempora directe &
velocitates reciproce sunt ut quadrata temporum, & propterea quantitates
materiæ sunt ut vires motrices & quadrata temporum, id est ut pondera &
quadrata temporum.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Ideoque si tempora sunt æqualia, quantitates materiæ in
singulis corporibus erunt ut pondera.

_Corol. 2._ Si pondera sunt æqualia, quantitates materiæ erunt ut quadrata
temporum.

_Corol. 3._ Si quantitates materiæ æquantur, pondera erunt reciproce ut
quadrata temporum.

_Corol. 4._ Unde cum quadrata temporum cæteris paribus sint ut longitudines
pendulorum; si & tempora & quantitates materiæ æqualia sunt, pondera erunt
ut longitudines pendulorum.

_Corol. 5._ Et universaliter, quantitas materiæ pendulæ est ut pondus &
quadratum temporis directe, & longitudo penduli inverse.

_Corol. 6._ Sed & in Medio non resistente quantitas Materiæ pendulæ est ut
pondus comparativum & quadratum temporis directe & longitudo penduli
inverse. Nam pondus comparativum est vis motrix corporis in Medio quovis
gravi, ut supra explicui; adeoque idem præstat in tali Medio non resistente
atque pondus absolutum in vacuo.

_Corol. 7._ Et hinc liquet ratio tum comparandi corpora inter se, quoad
quantitatem materiæ in singulis, tum comparandi pondera ejusdem corporis in
diversis locis, ad cognoscendam variationem gravitatis. Factis autem
experimentis quam accuratissimis inveni semper quantitatem materiæ in
corporibus singulis eorum ponderi proportionalem esse.

Prop. XXV. Theor. XIX.

    _Corpora Funependula quæ in Medio quovis resistuntur in ratione
    momentorum temporis, quæque in ejusdem gravitatis specificæ Medio non
    resistente moventur, oscillationes in Cycloide eodem tempore peragunt,
    & arcuum partes proportionales simul describunt._

[Illustration]

Sit AB Cycloidis arcus, quem corpus D tempore quovis in Medio non
resistente oscillando describit. Bisecetur idem in C, ita ut C sit infimum
ejus punctum; & erit vis acceleratrix qua corpus urgetur in loco quovis D
vel d vel E ut longitudo arcus CD vel Cd vel CE. Exponatur vis illa per
eundem arcum; & cum resistentia sit ut momentum temporis, adeoque detur,
exponatur eadem per datam arcus Cycloidis partem CO, & sumatur arcus Od in
ratione ad arcum CD quam habet arcus OB ad arcum CB: & vis qua corpus in d
urgetur in Medio resistente, cum sit excessus vis Cd supra resistentiam CO,
exponetur per arcum Od, adeoque erit ad vim qua corpus D urgetur in Medio
non resistente, in loco D, ut arcus Od ad arcum CD; & propterea etiam in
loco B ut arcus OB ad arcum CB. Proinde si corpora duo, D, d exeant de loco
B & his viribus urgeantur: cum vires sub initio sint ut arcus CB & OB,
erunt velocitates primæ & arcus primo descripti in eadem ratione. Sunto
arcus illi BD & Bd, & arcus reliqui CD, Od erunt in eadem ratione. Proinde
vires ipsis CD, Od proportionales manebunt in eadem ratione ac sub initio,
& propterea corpora pergent arcus in eadem ratione simul describere. Igitur
vires & velocitates & arcus reliqui CD, Od semper erunt ut arcus toti CD,
OB, & propterea arcus illi reliqui simul describentur. Quare corpora duo D,
d simul pervenient ad loca C & O, alterum quidem in Medio non resistente ad
locum C, & alterum in Medio resistente ad locum O. Cum autem velocitates in
C & O sint ut arcus CB & OB; erunt arcus quos corpora ulterius pergendo
simul describunt, in eadem ratione. Sunto illi CE & Oe. Vis qua corpus D in
Medio non resistente retardatur in E est ut CE, & vis qua corpus d in Medio
resistente retardatur in e est ut summa vis Ce & resistentiæ CO, id est ut
Oe; ideoque vires, quibus corpora retardantur, sunt ut arcubus CE, Oe
proportionales arcus CB, OB; proindeque velocitates in data illa ratione
retardatæ manent in eadem illa data ratione. Velocitates igitur & arcus
iisdem descripti semper sunt ad invicem in data illa ratione arcuum CB &
OB; & propterea si sumantur arcus toti AB, aB in eadem ratione, corpora D,
d simul describent hos arcus, & in locis A & a motum omnem simul amittent.
Isochronæ sunt igitur oscillationes totæ, & arcubus totis BA, BE
proportionales sunt arcuum partes quælibet BD, Bd vel BE, Be quæ simul
describuntur.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol._ Igitur motus velocissimus in Medio resistente non incidit in
punctum infimum C, sed reperitur in puncto illo O, quo arcus totus
descriptus aB bisecatur. Et corpus subinde pergendo ad a, iisdem gradibus
retardatur quibus antea accelerabatur in descensu suo a B ad O.

Prop. XXVI. Theor. XX.

    _Corporum Funependulorum, quæ resistuntur in ratione velocitatum,
    oscillationes in Cycloide sunt Isochronæ._

Nam si corpora duo a centris suspensionum æqualiter distantia, oscillando
describant arcus inæquales, & velocitates in arcuum partibus
correspondentibus sint ad invicem ut arcus toti; resistentiæ velocitatibus
proportionales erunt etiam ad invicem ut iidem arcus. Proinde si viribus
motricibus a gravitate oriundis, quæ sint ut iidem arcus auferantur,
conferantur vel addantur hæ resistentiæ, erunt differentiæ vel summæ ad
invicem in eadem arcuum ratione: cumque velocitatum incrementa vel
decrementa sint ut hæ differentiæ vel summæ, velocitates semper erunt ut
arcus toti: Igitur velocitates, si sint in aliquo casu ut arcus toti,
manebunt semper in eadem ratione. Sed in principio motus, ubi corpora
incipiunt descendere & arcus illos describere, vires, cum sint arcubus
proportionales, generabunt velocitates arcubus proportionales. Ergo
velocitates semper erunt ut arcus toti describendi, & propterea arcus illi
simul describentur.   _Q. E. D._

Prop. XXVII. Theor. XXI.

    _Si corpora Funependula resistuntur in duplicata ratione velocitatum,
    differentiæ inter tempora oscillationum in Medio resistente ac tempora
    oscillationum in ejusdem gravitatis specificæ Medio non resistente,
    erunt arcubus oscillando descriptis proportionales, quam proxime._

Nam pendulis æqualibus in Medio resistente describantur arcus inæquales A,
B; resistentia corporis in arcu A, erit ad resistentiam corporis in parte
correspondente arcus B, in duplicata ratione velocitatum, id est ut A quad.
ad B quad. quamproxime. Si resistentia in arcu B esset ad resistentiam in
arcu A ut rectangulum AB ad A quad. tempora in arcubus A & B forent æqualia
per Propositionem superiorem. Ideoque resistentia A quad. in arcu A, vel AB
in arcu B, efficit excessum temporis in arcu A supra tempus in Medio non
resistente; & resistentia BB efficit excessum temporis in arcu B supra
tempus in Medio non resistente. Sunt autem excessus illi ut vires
efficientes AB & BB quam proxime, id est ut arcus A & B.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Hinc ex oscillationum temporibus, in Medio resistente in
arcubus inæqualibus factarum, cognosci possunt tempora oscillationum in
ejusdem gravitatis specificæ Medio non resistente. Nam si verbi gratia
arcus sit altero duplo major, differentia temporum erit ad excessum
temporis in arcu minore supra tempus in Medio non resistente, ut
differentia arcuum ad arcum minorem.

_Corol. 2._ Oscillationes breviores sunt magis Isochronæ, & brevissimæ
iisdem temporibus peraguntur ac in Medio non resistente, quam proxime.
Earum vero quæ in majoribus arcubus fiunt, tempora sunt paulo majora,
propterea quod resistentia in descensu corporis qua tempus producitur,
major sit pro ratione longitudinis in descensu descriptæ, quam resistentia
in ascensu subsequente qua tempus contrahitur. Sed & tempus oscillationum
tam brevium quam longarum nonnihil produci videtur per motum Medii. Nam
corpora tardescentia paulo minus resistuntur pro ratione velocitatis, &
corpora accelerata paulo magis quam quæ uniformiter progrediuntur: id adeo
quia Medium, eo quem a corporibus accepit motu, in eandem plagam pergendo,
in priore casu magis agitatur, in posteriore minus; ac proinde magis vel
minus cum corporibus motis conspirat. Pendulis igitur in descensu magis
resistit, in ascensu minus quam pro ratione velocitatis, & ex utraque causa
tempus producitur.

Prop. XXVIII. Theor. XXII.

    _Si corpus Funependulum in Cycloide oscillans resistitur in ratione
    momentorum temporis, erit ejus resistentia ad vim gravitatis ut
    excessus arcus descensu toto descripti supra arcum ascensu subsequente
    descriptum, ad penduli longitudinem duplicatam._

Designet BC arcum descensu descriptum, Ca arcum ascensu descriptum, & Aa
differentiam arcuum: & stantibus quæ in Propositione XXV. constructa &
demonstrata sunt, erit vis qua corpus oscillans urgetur in loco quovis D,
ad uim resistentia ut arcus CD ad arcum CO, qui semissis est differentiæ
illius Aa. Ideoque vis qua corpus oscillans urgetur in Cycloidis principio
seu puncto altissimo, id est vis gravitatis, erit ad resistentiam ut arcus
Cycloidis inter punctum illud supremum & punctum infimum C ad arcum CO; id
est (si arcus duplicentur) ut Cycloidis totius arcus, seu dupla penduli
longitudo, ad arcum Aa.   _Q. E. D._

Prop. XXIX. Prob. VII.

    _Posito quod corpus in Cycloide oscillans resistitur in duplicata
    ratione velocitatis: invenire resistentiam in locis singulis._

[Illustration]

Sit Ba (_Fig. Prop. XXV._) arcus oscillatione integra descriptus, sitque C
infimum Cycloidis punctum, & CZ semissis arcus Cycloidis totius,
longitudini Penduli æqualis; & quæratur resistentia corporis in loco quovis
D. Secetur recta infinita OQ in punctis O, C, P, Q ea lege ut (si erigantur
perpendicula OK, CT, PI, QE, centroque O & Asymptotis OK, OQ describatur
Hyperbola TIGE secans perpendicula CT, PI, QE in T, I & E, & per punctum I
agatur KF occurrens Asymptoto OK in K, & perpendiculis CT & QE in L & F)
fuerit area Hyperbolica PIEQ ad aream Hyperbolicam PITC ut arcus BC
descensu corporis descriptus ad arcum Ca ascensu descriptum, & area IEF ad
aream ILT ut OQ ad OC. Dein perpendiculo MN abscindatur area Hyperbolica
PINM quæ sit ad aream Hyperbolicam PIEQ ut arcus CZ ad arcum BC descensu
descriptum. Et si perpendiculo RG abscindatur area Hyperbolica PIGR, quæ
sit ad aream PIEQ ut arcus quilibet CD ad arcum BC descensu toto
descriptum: erit resistentia in loco D ad vim gravitatis, ut area {OR ÷ OQ}
IEF - IGH ad aream PIENM.

Nam cum vires a gravitate oriundæ quibus corpus in locis Z, B, D, a
urgetur, sint ut arcus CZ, CB, CD, Ca, & arcus illi sint ut areæ PINM,
PIEQ, PIGR, PITC; exponatur tum arcus tum vires per has areas respective.
Sit insuper Dd spatium quam minimum a corpore descendente descriptum, &
exponatur idem per aream quam minimam RGgr parallelis RG, rg comprehensam;
& producatur rg ad h, ut sint GHhg, & RGgr contemporanea arearum IGH, PIGR
decrementa. Et areæ {OR ÷ OQ} IEF - IGH incrementum GHhg - {Rr ÷ OQ} IEF,
seu Rr × HG - {Rr ÷ OQ} IEF, erit ad areæ PIGR decrementum RGgr seu Rr ×
RG, ut HG - {IEF ÷ OQ} ad RG; adeoque ut OR × HG - {OR ÷ OQ} IEF ad OR × GR
seu OP × PI: hoc est (ob æqualia OR × HG, OR × HR - OR × GR, ORHK - OPIK,
PIHR & PIGR + IGH) ut PIGR + IGH - {OR ÷ OQ} IEF ad OPIK. Igitur si area
{OR ÷ OQ} IEF - IGH dicatur Y, atque areæ PIGR decrementum RGgr detur, erit
incrementum areæ Y ut PIGR - Y.

Quod si V designet vim a gravitate oriundam arcui describendo CD
proportionalem, qua corpus urgetur in D; & R pro resistentia ponatur: erit
V - R vis tota qua corpus urgetur in D, adeoque ut incrementum velocitatis
in data temporis particula factum. Est autem resistentia R (per Hypothesin)
ut quadratum velocitatis, & inde (per Lem. II.) incrementum resistentiæ ut
velocitas & incrementum velocitatis conjunctim, id est ut spatium data
temporis particula descriptum & V - R conjunctim; atque adeo, si momentum
spatii detur, ut V - R; id est, si pro vi V scribatur ejus exponens PIGR, &
resistentia R exponatur per aliam aliquam aream Z, ut PIGR - Z.

Igitur area PIGR per datorum momentorum subductionem uniformiter
decrescente, crescunt area Y in ratione PIGR - Y, & area Z in ratione PIGR
- Z. Et propterea si areæ Y & Z simul incipiant & sub initio æquales sint,
hæ per additionem æqualium momentorum pergent esse æquales, & æqualibus
itidem momentis subinde decrescentes simul evanescent. Et vicissim, si
simul incipiunt & simul evanescunt, æqualia habebunt momenta & semper erunt
æquales: id adeo quia si resistentia Z augeatur, velocitas una cum arcu
illo Ca, qui in ascensu corporis describitur, diminuetur; & puncto in quo
motus omnis una cum resistentia cessat propius accedente ad punctum C,
resistentia citius evanescet quam area Y. Et contrarium eveniet ubi
resistentia diminuitur.

Jam vero area Z incipit desinitque ubi resistentia nulla est, hoc est, in
principio & fine motus, ubi arcus CD, CD arcubus CB & Ca æquantur, adeoque
ubi recta RG incidit in rectas QE & CT. Et area Y seu {OR ÷ OQ} IEF - IGH
incipit desinitque ubi nulla est, adeoque ubi {OR ÷ OQ} IEF & IGH æqualia
sunt: hoc est (per constructionem) ubi recta RG incidit in rectam QE & CT.
Proindeque areæ illæ simul incipiunt & simul evanescunt, & propterea semper
sunt æquales. Igitur area {OR ÷ OQ} IEF - IGH æqualis est areæ Z, per quam
resistentia exponitur, & propterea est ad aream PINM per quam gravitas
exponitur, ut resistentia ad gravitatem.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Est igitur resistentia in loco infimo C ad vim gravitatis, ut
area {OP ÷ OQ} IEF ad aream PINM.

_Corol. 2._ Fit autem maxima, ubi area PIHR est ad aream IEF ut OR ad OQ.
Eo enim in casu momentum ejus (nimirum PIGR - Y) evadit nullum.

_Corol. 3._ Hinc etiam innotescit velocitas in locis singulis: quippe quæ
est in dimidiata ratione resistentiæ, & ipso motus initio æquatur
velocitati corporis in eadem Cycloide absque omni resistentia oscillantis.

Cæterum ob difficilem calculum quo resistentia & velocitas per hanc
Propositionem inveniendæ sunt, visum est Propositionem sequentem
subjungere, quæ & generalior sit & ad usus Philosophicos abunde satis
accurata.

Prop. XXX. Theor. XXIII.

    _Si recta aB æqualis sit Cycloidis arcui quem corpus oscillando
    describit, & ad singula ejus puncta D erigantur perpendicula DK, quæ
    sint ad longitudinem Penduli ut resistentia corporis in arcus punctis
    correspondentibus ad vim gravitatis: dico quod differentia inter arcum
    descensu toto descriptum, & arcum ascensu toto subsequente descriptum,
    ducta in arcuum eorundem semisummam, æqualis erit areæ BKaB a
    perpendiculis omnibus DK occupatæ, quamproxime._

[Illustration]

Exponatur enim tum Cycloidis arcus oscillatione integra descriptus, per
rectam illam sibi æqualem aB, tum arcus qui describeretur in vacuo per
longitudinem AB. Bisecetur AB in C, & punctum C repræsentabit infimum
Cycloidis punctum, & erit CD ut vis a gravitate oriunda, qua corpus in D
secundum Tangentem Cycloidis urgetur, eamque habebit rationem ad
longitudinem Penduli quam habet vis in D ad vim gravitatis. Exponatur
igitur vis illa per longitudinem CD, & vis gravitatis per longitudinem
penduli; & si in DE capiatur DK in ea ratione ad longitudinem penduli quam
habet resistentia ad gravitatem, erit DK exponens resistentiæ. Centro C &
intervallo CA vel CB construatur semicirculus, BEeA. Describat autem corpus
tempore quam minimo spatium Dd, & erectis perpendiculis DE, de
circumferentiæ occurrentibus in E & e, erunt hæc ut velocitates quas corpus
in vacuo, descendendo a puncto B, acquireret in locis D & d. Patet hoc per
Prop. LII. Lib. I. Exponantur itaq; hæ velocitates per perpendicula illa
DE, de; sitque DF velocitas quam acquirit in D cadendo de B in Medio
resistente. Et si centro C & intervallo CF describatur circulus FfM
occurrens rectis de & AB in f & M, erit M locus ad quem deinceps absque
ulteriore resistentia ascenderet, & df velocitas quam acquireret in d. Unde
etiam si Fg designet velocitatis momentum quod corpus D, describendo
spatium quam minimum Dd, ex resistentia Medii amittit, & sumatur CN æqualis
Cg: erit N locus ad quem corpus deinceps absque ulteriore resistentia
ascenderet, & MN erit decrementum ascensus ex velocitatis illius amissione
oriundum. Ad df demittatur perpendiculum Fm, & velocitatis DF decrementum
fg a resistentia DK genitum, erit ad velocitatis ejusdem incrementum fma vi
CD genitum, ut vis generans DK ad vim generantem CD. Sed & ob similia
triangula Fmf, Fhg, FDC, est fm ad Fm seu Dd, ut CD ad DF, & ex æquo Fg ad
Dd ut DK ad DF. Item Fg ad Fh ut CF ad DF; & ex æquo perturbate Fh seu MN
ad Dd ut DK ad CF. Sumatur DR ad ½aB ut DK ad CF, & erit MN ad Dd ut DR ad
½aB; ideoque summa omnium MN × ½aB, id est Aa × ½aB, æqualis erit summæ
omnium Dd × DR, id est areæ BRrSa, quam rectangula omnia Dd × DR seu DRrd
componunt. Bisecentur Aa & aB in P & O, & erit ½aB seu OB æqualis CP,
ideoque DR est ad DK ut CP ad CF vel CM, & divisim KR ad DR ut PM ad CP.
Ideoque cum punctum M, ubi corpus versatur in medio oscillationis loco O,
incidat circiter in punctum P, & priore oscillationis parte versetur inter
A & P, posteriore autem inter P & a, utroque in casu æqualiter a puncto P
in partes contrarias errans: punctum K circa medium oscillationis locum, id
est e regione puncti O, puta in V, incidet in punctum R; in priore autem
oscillationis parte jacebit inter R & E, & in posteriore inter R & D,
utroque in casu æqualiter a puncto R in partes contrarias errans. Proinde
area quam linea KR describit, priore oscillationis parte jacebit extra
aream BRSa, posteriore intra eandem, idque dimensionibus hinc inde
propemodum æquatis inter se; & propterea in casu priore addita areæ BRSa,
in posteriore eidem subducta, relinquet aream BKTa areæ BRSa æqualem quam
proxime. Ergo rectangulum Aa × ½aB seu AaO, cum sit æquale areæ BRSa, erit
etiam æquale areæ BKTa quamproxime.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol._ Hinc ex lege resistentiæ & arcuum Ca, CB differentia Aa, colligi
potest proportio resistentiæ ad gravitatem quam proxime.

Nam si uniformis sit resistentia DK, figura aBKkT rectangulum erit sub Ba &
DK, & inde rectangulum sub ½Ba & Aa æqualis erit rectangulo sub Ba & DK, &
DK æqualis erit ½Aa. Quare cum DK sit exponens resistentiæ, & longitudo
penduli exponens gravitatis, erit resistentia ad gravitatem ut ½Aa ad
longitudinem Penduli; omnino ut in Propositione XXVIII. demonstratum est.

Si resistentia sit ut velocitas, Figura aBKkT Ellipsis erit quam proxime.
Nam si corpus, in Medio non resistente, oscillatione integra describeret
longitudinem BA, velocitas in loco quovis D foret ut circuli diametro AB
descripti ordinatim applicata DE. Proinde cum Ba in Medio resistente & BA
in Medio non resistente, æqualibus circiter temporibus describantur;
adeoque velocitates in singulis ipsius Ba punctis, sint quam proxime ad
velocitates in punctis correspondentibus longitudinis BA, ut est Ba ad BA;
erit velocitas DK in Medio resistente ut circuli vel Ellipseos super
diametro Ba descripti ordinatim applicata; adeoque figura BKVTa Ellipsis,
quam proxime. Cum resistentia velocitati proportionalis supponatur, sit OV
exponens resistentiæ in puncto Medio O; & Ellipsis, centro O, semiaxibus
OB, OV descripta, figuram aBKVT, eique æquale rectangulum Aa × BO, æquabit
quam proxime. Est igitur Aa × BO ad OV × BO ut area Ellipseos hujus ad OV ×
BO: id est Aa ad OV ut area semicirculi, ad quadratum radii sive ut 11 and
7 circiter: Et propterea: 7/11Aa ad longitudinem penduli ut corporis
oscillantis resistentia in O ad ejusdem gravitatem.

Quod si resistentia DK sit in duplicata ratione velocitatis, figura BKTVa
Parabola erit verticem habens V & axem OV, ideoque æqualis erit duabus
tertiis partibus rectanguli sub Ba & OV quam proxime. Est igitur
rectangulum sub ½Ba & Aa æquale rectangulo sub 2/3Ba & OV, adeoque OV
æqualis ¾Aa, & propterea corporis oscillantis resistentia in O ad ipsius
gravitatem ut ¾Aa ad longitudinem Penduli.

Atque has conclusiones in rebus practicis abunde satis accuratas esse
censeo. Nam cum Ellipsis vel Parabola congruat cum figura BKVTa in puncto
medio V, hæc si ad partem alterutram BKV vel VTa excedit figuram illam,
deficiet ab eadem ad partem alteram, & sic eidem æquabitur quam proxime.

Prop. XXXI. Theor. XXIV.

    _Si corporis oscillantis resistentia in singulis arcuum descriptorum
    partibus proportionalibus augeatur vel minuatur in data ratione;
    differentia inter arcum descensu descriptum & arcum subsequente ascensu
    descriptum, augebitur vel diminuetur in eadem ratione quamproxime._

Oritur enim differentia illa ex retardatione Penduli per resistentiam
Medii, adeoque est ut retardatio tota eique proportionalis resistentia
retardans. In superiore Propositione rectangulum sub recta ½aB & arcuum
illorum CB, Ca differentia Aa, æqualis erat areæ BKT. Et area illa, si
maneat longitudo aB, augetur vel diminuitur in ratione ordinatim
applicatarum DK; hoc est in ratione resistentiæ, adeoque est ut longitudo
aB & resistentia conjunctim. Proindeque rectangulum sub Aa & ½aB est ut aB
& resistentia conjunctim, & propterea Aa ut resistentia.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Unde si resistentia sit ut velocitas, differentia arcuum in
eodem Medio erit ut arcus totus descriptus: & contra.

_Corol. 2._ Si resistentia sit in duplicata ratione velocitatis,
differentia illa erit in duplicata ratione arcus totius; & contra.

_Corol. 3._ Et universaliter, si resistentia sit in triplicata vel alia
quavis ratione velocitatis, differentia erit in eadem ratione arcus totius;
& contra.

_Corol. 4._ Et si resistentia sit partim in ratione simplici velocitatis,
partim in ejusdem ratione duplicata, differentia erit partim in ratione
arcus totius & partim in ejus ratione duplicata; & contra. Eadem erit lex &
ratio resistentiæ pro velocitate, quæ est differentiæ illius pro
longitudine arcus.

_Corol. 5._ Ideoque si, pendulo inæquales arcus successive describente,
inveniri potest ratio incrementi ac decrementi resistentiæ hujus pro
longitudine arcus descripti, habebitur etiam ratio incrementi ac decrementi
resistentiæ pro velocitate majore vel minore.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. VII.

_De Motu Fluidorum & resistentia Projectilium._

Prop. XXXII. Theor. XXV.

    _Si corporum Systemata duo ex æquali particularum numero constent &
    particulæ correspondentes similes sint, singulæ in uno Systemate
    singulis in altero, ac datam habeant rationem densitatis ad invicem, &
    inter se temporibus proportionalibus similiter moveri incipiant, (eæ
    inter se quæ in uno sunt Systemate & eæ inter se quæ sunt in altero) &
    si non tangant se mutuo quæ in eodem sunt Systemate, nisi in momentis
    reflexionum, neque attrahant vel fugent se mutuo, nisi viribus
    acceleratricibus quæ sint ut particularum correspondentium diametri
    inverse & quadrata velocitatum directe: dico quod Systematum particulæ
    ille pergent inter se temporibus proportionalibus similiter moveri; &
    contra._

Corpora similia temporibus proportionalibus inter se similiter moveri dico,
quorum situs ad invicem in fine temporum illorum semper sunt similes: puta
si particulæ unius Systematis cum alterius particulis correspondentibus
conferantur. Unde tempora erunt proportionalia, in quibus similes &
proportionales figurarum similium partes a particulis correspondentibus
describuntur. Igitur si duo sint ejusmodi Systemata, particulæ
correspondentes, ob similitudinem incæptorum motuum, pergent similiter
moveri usque donec sibi mutuo occurrant. Nam si nullis agitantur viribus,
progredientur uniformiter in lineis rectis per motus Leg. I. Si viribus
aliquibus se mutuo agitant, & vires illæ sint ut particularum
correspondentium diametri inverse & quadrata velocitatum directe; quoniam
particularum situs sunt similes & vires proportionales, vires totæ quibus
particulæ correspondentes agitantur, ex viribus singulis agitantibus (per
Legum Corollarium secundum) compositæ, similes habebunt determinationes,
perinde ac si centra inter particulas similiter sita respicerent; & erunt
vires illæ totæ ad invicem ut vires singulæ componentes, hoc est ut
correspondentium particularum diametri inverse, & quadrata velocitatum
directe: & propterea efficient ut correspondentes particulæ figuras similes
describere pergant. Hæc ita se habebunt per Corol. 1. 2, & 7. Prop. IV. si
modo centra illa quiescant. Sin moveantur, quoniam ob translationum
similitudinem, similes manent eorum situs inter Systematum particulas;
similes inducentur mutationes in figuris quas particulæ describunt. Similes
igitur erunt correspondentium & similium particularum motus usque ad
occursus suos primos, & propterea similes occursus, & similes reflexiones,
& subinde (per jam ostensa) similes motus inter se, donec iterum in se
mutuo inciderint, & sic deinceps in infinitum.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si corpora duo quævis, quæ similia sint & ad Systematum
particulas correspondentes similiter sita, inter ipsas temporibus
proportionalibus similiter moveri incipiant, sintque eorum densitates ad
invicem ut densitates correspondentium particularum: hæc pergent temporibus
proportionalibus similiter moveri. Est enim eadem ratio partium majorum
Systematis utriusque atque particularum.

_Corol. 2._ Et si similes & similiter positæ Systematum partes omnes
quiescant inter se: & earum duæ, quæ cæteris majores sint, & sibi mutuo in
utroque Systemate correspondeant, secundum lineas similiter sitas simili
cum motu utcunque moveri incipiant: hæ similes in reliquis systematum
partibus excitabunt motus, & pergent inter ipsas temporibus
proportionalibus similiter moveri; atque adeo spatia diametris suis
proportionalia describere.

Prop. XXXIII. Theor. XXVI.

    _Iisdem positis, dico quod Systematum partes majores resistuntur in
    ratione composita ex duplicata ratione velocitatum suarum & duplicata
    ratione diametrorum & ratione densitatis partium Systematum._

Nam resistentia oritur partim ex viribus centripetis vel centrifugis quibus
particulæ systematum se mutuo agitant, partim ex occursibus & reflexionibus
particularum & partium majorum. Prioris autem generis resistentiæ sunt ad
invicem ut vires totæ motrices a quibus oriuntur, id est ut vires totæ
acceleratrices & quantitates materiæ in partibus correspondentibus; hoc est
(per Hypothesin) ut quadrata velocitatum directe & distantiæ particularum
correspondentium inverse & quantitates materiæ in partibus
correspondentibus directe: ideoque (cum distantiæ particularum systematis
unius sint ad distantias correspondentes particularum alterius, ut diameter
particulæ vel partis in systemate priore ad diametrum particulæ vel partis
correspondentis in altero, & quantitates materiæ sint ut densitates partium
& cubi diametrorum) resistentiæ sunt ad invicem ut quadrata velocitatum &
quadrata diametrorum & densitates partium Systematum.   _Q. E. D._
Posterioris generis resistentiæ sunt ut reflexionum correspondentium numeri
& vires conjunctim. Numeri autem reflexionum sunt ad invicem ut velocitates
partium correspondentium directe, & spatia inter eorum reflexiones inverse.
Et vires reflexionum sunt ut velocitates & magnitudines & densitates
partium correspondentium conjunctim; id est ut velocitates & diametrorum
cubi & densitates partium. Et conjunctis his omnibus rationibus,
resistentiæ partium correspondentium sunt ad invicem ut quadrata
velocitatum & quadrata diametrorum & densitates partium conjunctim.
_Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Igitur si systemata illa sint Fluida duo Elastica ad modum
Aeris, & partes eorum quiescant inter se: corpora autem duo similia &
partibus fluidorum quoad magnitudinem & densitatem proportionalia, & inter
partes illas similiter posita, secundum lineas similiter positas utcunque
projiciantur; vires autem motrices, quibus particulæ Fluidorum se mutuo
agitant, sint ut corporum projectorum diametri inverse, & quadrata
velocitatum directe: corpora illa temporibus proportionalibus similes
excitabunt motus in Fluidis, & spatia similia ac diametris suis
proportionalia describent.

_Corol. 2._ Proinde in eodem Fluido projectile velox resistitur in
duplicata ratione velocitatis quam proxime. Nam si vires, quibus particulæ
distantes se mutuo agitant, augerentur in duplicata ratione velocitatis,
projectile resisteretur in eadem ratione duplicata accurate; ideoque in
Medio, cujus partes ab invicem distantes sese viribus nullis agitant,
resistentia est in duplicata ratione velocitatis accurate. Sunto igitur
Media tria A, B, C ex partibus similibus & æqualibus & secundum distantias
æquales regulariter dispositis constantia. Partes Mediorum A & B fugiant se
mutuo viribus quæ sint ad invicem ut T & V, illæ Medii C ejusmodi viribus
omnino destituantur. Et si corpora quatuor æqualia D, E, F, G in his Mediis
moveantur, priora duo D & E in prioribus duobus A & B, & altera duo F & G
in tertio C; sitque velocitas corporis D ad velocitatem corporis E, &
velocitas corporis F ad velocitatem corporis G, in dimidiata ratione virium
T ad vires V; resistentia corporis D erit ad resistentiam corporis E, &
resistentia corporis F ad resistentiam corporis G in velocitatum ratione
duplicata; & propterea resistentia corporis D erit ad resistentiam corporis
F ut resistentia corporis E ad resistentiam corporis G. Sunto corpora D & F
æquivelocia ut & corpora E & G; & augendo velocitates corporum D & F in
ratione quacunque, ac diminuendo vires particularum Medii B in eadem
ratione duplicata, accedet Medium B ad formam & conditionem Medii C pro
lubitu, & idcirco resistentiæ corporum æqualium & æquivelocium E & G in his
Mediis, perpetuo accedent ad æqualitatem, ita ut earum differentia evadat
tandem minor quam data quævis. Proinde cum resistentiæ corporum D & F sint
ad invicem ut resistentiæ corporum E & G, accedent etiam hæ similiter ad
rationem æqualitatis. Corporum igitur D & F, ubi velocissime moventur,
resistentiæ sunt æquales quam proxime: & propterea cum resistentia corporis
F sit in duplicata ratione velocitatis, erit resistentia corporis D in
eadem ratione quamproxime.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 3._ Igitur corporis in Fluido quovis Elastico velocissime moventis
eadem fere est resistentia ac si partes Fluidi viribus suis centrifugis
destituerentur, seque mutuo non fugerent: si modo Fluidi vis Elastica ex
particularum viribus centrifugis oriatur.

_Corol. 4._ Proinde cum resistentiæ similium & æquivelocium corporum, in
Medio cujus partes distantes se mutuo non fugiunt, sint ut quadrata
diametrorum, sunt etiam æquivelocium & celerrime moventium corporum
resistentiæ in Fluido Elastico ut quadrata diametrorum quam proxime.

_Corol. 5._ Et cum corpora similia, æqualia & æquivelocia, in Mediis
ejusdem densitatis, quorum particulæ se mutuo non fugiunt, sive particulæ
illæ sint plures & minores, sive pauciores & majores, in æqualem materiæ
quantitatem temporibus æqualibus inpingant, eique æqualem motus quantitatem
imprimant, & vicissim (per motus Legem tertiam) æqualem ab eadem reactionem
patiantur, hoc est, æqualiter resistantur: manifestum est etiam quod in
ejusdem densitatis Fluidis Elasticis, ubi velocissime moventur, æquales
sint eorum resistentiæ quam proxime; sive Fluida illa ex particulis
crassioribus constent, sive ex omnium subtilissimis constituantur. Ex Medii
subtilitate resistentia projectilium celerrime motorum non multum
diminuitur.

_Corol. 6._ Cum autem particulæ Fluidorum, propter vires quibus se mutuo
fugiunt, moveri nequeant quin simul agitent particulas alias in circuitu,
atque adeo difficilius moveantur inter se quam si viribus istis
destituerentur; & quo majores sint earum vires centrifugæ, eo difficilius
moveantur inter se: manifestum esse videtur quod projectile in tali Fluido
eo difficilius movebitur, quo vires illæ sunt intensiores; & propterea si
corporis velocissimi in superioribus Corollariis velocitas diminuatur,
quoniam resistentia diminueretur in duplicata ratione velocitatis, si modo
vires particularum in eadem ratione duplicata diminuerentur; vires autem
nullatenus diminuantur, manifestum est quod resistentia diminuetur in
ratione minore quam duplicata velocitatis.

_Corol. 7._ Porro cum vires centrifugæ eo nomine ad augendam resistentiam
conducant, quod particulæ motus suos per Fluidum ad majorem a se distantiam
per vires illas propagent; & cum distantia illa minorem habeat rationem ad
majora corpora: manifestum est quod augmentum resistentiæ ex viribus illis
oriundum in corporibus majoribus minoris sit momenti; & propterea, quo
corpora sint majora eo magis accurate resistentia tardescentium decrescet
in duplicata ratione velocitatis.

_Corol. 8._ Unde etiam ratio illa duplicata magis accurate obtinebit in
Fluidis quæ, pari densitate & vi Elastica, ex particulis minoribus
constant. Nam si corpora illa majora diminuantur, & particulæ Fluidi,
manente ejus densitate & vi Elastica, diminuantur in eadem ratione; manebit
eadem ratio resistentiæ quæ prius: ut ex præcedentibus facile colligitur.

_Corol. 9._ Hæc omnia ita se habent in Fluidis, quorum vis Elastica ex
particularum viribus centrifugis originem ducit. Quod si vis illa aliunde
oriatur, veluti ex particularum expansione ad instar Lanæ vel ramorum
arborum, aut ex alia quavis causa, qua motus particularum inter se
redduntur minus liberi: resistentia, ob minorem Medii fluiditatem, erit
major quam in superioribus Corollariis.

Prop. XXXIV. Theor. XXVII.

    _Quæ in præcedentibus duabus Propositionibus demonstrata sunt, obtinent
    ubi particulæ Systematum se mutuo contingunt, si modo particulæ illæ
    sint summe lubricæ._

Concipe particulas viribus quibusdam se mutuo fugere, & vires illas in
accessu ad superficies particularum augeri in infinitum, & contra, in
recessu ab iisdem celerrime diminui & statim evanescere. Concipe etiam
systemata comprimi, ita ut partes eorum se mutuo contingant, nisi quatenus
vires illæ contactum impediunt. Sint autem spatia per quæ vires
particularum diffunduntur quam angustissima, ita ut particulæ se mutuo quam
proxime contingant: & motus particularum inter se iidem erunt quam proxime
ac si se mutuo contingerent. Eadem facilitate labentur inter se ac si
essent summe lubricæ, & si impingant in se mutuo reflectentur ab invicem
ope virium præfatarum, perinde ac si essent Elasticæ. Itaque motus erunt
iidem in utroque casu, nisi quatenus perexigua particularum sese non
contingentium intervalla diversitatem efficiant: quæ quidem diversitas
diminuendo particularum intervalla diminui potest in infinitum. Jam vero
quæ in præcedentibus duabus Propositionibus demonstrata sunt, obtinent in
particulis sese non contingentibus, idque licet intervalla particularum,
diminuendo spatia per quæ vires diffunduntur, diminuantur in infinitum. Et
propterea eadem obtinent in particulis sese contingentibus, exceptis solum
differentiis quæ tandem differentiis quibusvis datis minores evadant. Dico
igitur quod accurate obtinent. Si negas, assigna differentiam in casu
quocunque. Atqui jam probatum est quod differentia minor sit quam data
quævis. Ergo differentia falso assignatur, & propterea nulla est.
_Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Igitur si Systematum duorum partes omnes quiescant inter se,
exceptis duabus, quæ cæteris majores sint & sibi mutuo correspondeant inter
cæteras similiter sitæ. Hæ secundum lineas similiter positas utcunque
projectæ similes excitabunt motus in Systematibus, & temporibus
proportionalibus pergent spatia similia & diametris suis proportionalia
describere; & resistentur in ratione composita ex duplicata ratione
velocitatum & duplicata ratione diametrorum & ratione densitatis
Systematum.

_Corol. 2._ Unde si Systemata illa sint Fluida duo similia, & eorum partes
duæ majores sint corpora in iisdem projecta: sint autem Fluidorum particulæ
summe lubricæ, & quoad magnitudinem & densitatem proportionales corporibus:
pergent corpora temporibus proportionalibus spatia similia & diametris suis
proportionalia describere, & resistentur in ratione Corollario superiore
definita.

_Corol. 3._ Proinde in eodem Fluido Projectile magnitudine datum resistitur
in duplicata ratione velocitatis.

_Corol. 4._ At si particulæ Fluidi non sint summe lubricæ, vel si viribus
quibuscunque se mutuo agitant, quibus motuum libertas diminuitur:
Projectilia tardiora difficilius superabunt resistentiam, & propterea magis
resistentur quam in velocitatis ratione duplicata.

Prop. XXXV. Theor. XXVIII.

    _Si Globus & Cylindrus æqualibus diametris descripti, in Medio raro &
    Elastico, secundum plagam axis Cylindri, æquali cum velocitate
    celerrime moveantur: erit resistentia Globi duplo minor quam
    resistentia Cylindri._

[Illustration]

Nam quoniam resistentia (per Corol. 3. Prop. XXXIII.) eadem est quam
proxime ac si partes Fluidi viribus nullis se mutuo fugerent, supponamus
partes Fluidi ejusmodi viribus destitutas per spatia omnia uniformiter
dispergi. Et quoniam actio Medii in corpus eadem est (per Legum Corol. 5.)
sive corpus in Medio quiescente moveatur, sive Medii particulæ eadem cum
velocitate impingant in corpus quiescens: consideremus corpus tanquam
quiescens, & videamus quo impetu urgebitur a Medio movente. Designet igitur
ABKI corpus Sphæricum centro C semidiametro CA descriptum, & incidant
particulæ Medii data cum velocitate in corpus illud Sphæricum, secundum
rectas ipsi AC parallelas: Sitque FB ejusmodi recta. In ea capiatur LB
semidiametro CB æqualis, & ducatur BD quæ Sphæram tangat in B. In AC & BD
demittantur perpendiculares BE, DL, & vis qua particula Medii, secundum
rectam FB oblique incidendo, Globum ferit in B, erit ad vim qua particula
eadem Cylindrum ONGQ axe ACI circa Globum descriptum perpendiculariter
feriret in b, ut LD ad LB vel BE ad BC. Rursus efficacia hujus vis ad
movendum globum secundum incidentiæ suæ plagam FB vel AC, est ad ejusdem
efficaciam ad movendum globum secundum plagam determinationis suæ, id est
secundum plagam rectæ BC qua globum directe urget, ut BE ad BC. Et
conjunctis rationibus, efficacia particulæ, in globum secundum rectam FB
oblique incidentis, ad movendum eundem secundum plagam incidentiæ suæ, est
ad efficaciam particulæ ejusdem secundum eandem rectam in cylindrum
perpendiculariter incidentis, ad ipsum movendum in plagam eandem, ut BE
quadratum ad BC quadratum. Quare si ad cylindri basem circularem NAO
erigatur perpendiculum bHE, & sit bE æqualis radio AC, & bH æqualis BE
quad. ÷ CB, erit bH ad bE ut effectus particulæ in globum ad effectum
particulæ in cylindrum. Et propterea Solidum quod a rectis omnibus bH
occupatur erit ad solidum quod a rectis omnibus bE occupatur, ut effectus
particularum omnium in globum ad effectum particularum omnium in Cylindrum.
Sed solidum prius est Parabolois vertice V, axe CA & latere recto CA
descriptum, & solidum posterius est cylindrus Paraboloidi circumscriptus: &
notum est quod Parabolois sit semissis cylindri circumscripti. Ergo vis
tota Medii in globum est duplo minor quam ejusdem vis tota in cylindrum. Et
propterea si particulæ Medii quiescerent, & cylindrus ac globus æquali cum
velocitate moverentur, foret resistentia globi duplo minor quam resistentia
cylindri.   _Q. E. D._

_Scholium._

[Illustration]

Eadem methodo figuræ aliæ inter se quoad resistentiam comparari possunt,
eæque inveniri quæ ad motus suos in Mediis resistentibus continuandos
aptiores sunt. Ut si base circulari CEBH, quæ centro O, radio OC
describitur, & altitudine OD, construendum sit frustum coni CBGF, quod
omnium eadem basi & altitudine constructorum & secundum plagam axis sui
versus D progredientium frustorum minime resistatur: biseca altitudinem OD
in Q & produc, OQ ad S ut sit QS æqualis QC, & erit S vertex coni cujus
frustum quæritur.

Unde obiter cum angulus CSB semper sit acutus, consequens est, quod si
solidum ADBE convolutione figuræ Ellipticæ vel Ovalis ADBE circa axem AB
facta generetur, & tangatur figura generans a rectis tribus FG, GH, HI in
punctis F, B & I, ea lege ut GH sit perpendicularis ad axem in puncto
contactus B, & FG, HI cum eadem GH contineant angulos FGB, BHI graduum 135:
solidum, quod convolutione figuræ ADFGHIE circa axem eundem CB generatur,
minus resistitur quam solidum prius; si modo utrumque secundum plagam axis
sui AB progrediatur, & utriusque terminus B præcedat. Quam quidem
propositionem in construendis Navibus non inutilem futuram esse censeo.

[Illustration]

Quod si figura DNFB ejusmodi sit ut, si ab ejus puncto quovis N ad axem AB
demittatur perpendiculum NM, & a puncto dato G ducatur recta GR quæ
parallela sit rectæ figuram tangenti in N, & axem productum secet in R,
fuerit MN ad GR ut GR cub. ad 4BR × GBq.: Solidum quod figuræ hujus
revolutione circa axem AB facta describitur, in Medio raro & Elastico ab A
versus B velocissime movendo, minus resistetur quam aliud quodvis eadem
longitudine & latitudine descriptum Solidum circulare.

Prop. XXXVI. Prob. VIII.

    _Invenire resistentiam corporis Sphærici in Fluido raro & Elastico
    velocissime progredientis._ (Vide Fig. Pag. 325.)

Designet ABKI corpus Sphæricum centro C semidiametro CA descriptum.
Producatur CA primo ad S deinde ad R, ut sit AS pars tertia ipsius CA, & CR
sit ad CS ut densitas corporis Sphærici ad densitatem Medii. Ad CR
erigantur perpendicula PC, RX, centroque R & Asymptotis CR, RX describatur
Hyperbola quævis PVY. In CR capiatur CT longitudinis cujusvis, & erigatur
perpendiculum TV abscindens aream Hyperbolicam PCTV, & sit CZ latus hujus
areæ applicatæ ad rectam PC. Dico quod motus quem globus, describendo
spatium CZ, ex resistentia Medii amittet, erit ad ejus motum totum sub
initio ut longitudo CT ad longitudinem CR quamproxime.

Nam (per motuum Legem tertiam) motus quem cylindrus GNOQ circa globum
descriptus impingendo in Medii particulas amitteret, æqualis est motui quem
imprimeret in easdem particulas. Ponamus quod particulæ singulæ
reflectantur a cylindro, & ab eodem ea cum velocitate resiliant, quacum
cylindrus ad ipsas accedebat. Nam talis erit reflexio, per Legum Corol. 3.
si modo particulæ quam minime sint, & vi Elastica quam maxima reflectantur.
Velocitas igitur quacum a cylindro resiliunt, addita velocitati cylindri
componet totam velocitatem duplo majorem quam velocitas cylindri, &
propterea motus quem cylindrus ex reflexione particulæ cujusque amittit,
erit ad motum totum cylindri, ut particula duplicata ad cylindrum. Proinde
cum densitas Medii sit ad densitatem cylindri ut CS ad CR; si Ct sit
longitudo tempore quam minimo a cylindro descripta, erit motus eo tempore
amissus ad motum totum cylindri ut 2Ct × CS ad AI × CR. Ea enim est ratio
materiæ Medii, a cylindro protrusæ & reflexæ, ad massam cylindri. Unde cum
globus sit duæ tertiæ partes cylindri, & resistentia globi (per
Propositionem superiorem) sit duplo minor quam resistentia cylindri: erit
motus, quem globus describendo longitudinem L amittit, ad motum totum
globi, ut Ct × CS ad 2/3AI × CR, sive ut Ct ad CR. Erigatur perpendiculum
tv Hyperbolæ occurrens in v, & (per Corol. 1. Prop. V. Lib. II.) si corpus
describendo longitudinem areæ CtvP proportionalem, amittit motus sui totius
CR partem quamvis Ct, idem describendo longitudinem areæ CTVP
proportionalem, amittet motus sui partem CT. Sed longitudo Ct æqualis est
CPvt ÷ CP, & longitudo CZ (per Hypothesin) æqualis est CPTV ÷ CP, adeoque
longitudo Ct est ad longitudinem CZ ut area CPvt ad aream CPVT. Et
propterea cum globus describendo longitudinem quam minimam Ct amittat motus
sui partem, quæ sit ad totum ut Ct ad CR, is describendo longitudinem aliam
quamvis CZ, amittet motus sui partem quæ sit ad totum ut CT ad CR.
_Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Si detur corporis velocitas sub initio, dabitur tempus quo
corpus, describendo spatium Ct, amittet motus sui partem Ct: & inde,
dicendo quod resistentia sit ad vim gravitatis ut ista motus pars amissa ad
motum, quem gravitas Globi eodem tempore generaret; dabitur proportio
resistentiæ ad gravitatem Globi.

_Corol. 2._ Quoniam in his determinandis supposui quod particulæ Fluidi per
vim suam Elasticam quam maxime a Globo reflectantur, & particularum sic
reflexarum impetus in Globum duplo major sit quam si non reflecterentur:
manifestum est quod in Fluido, cujus particulæ vi omni Elastica aliaque
omni vi reflexiva destituuntur, corpus Sphæricum resistentiam duplo minorem
patietur; adeoque eandem velocitatis partem amittendo, duplo longius
progredietur quam pro constructione Problematis hujus superius allata.

_Corol. 3._ Et si particularum vis reflexiva neque maxima sit neque omnino
nulla, sed mediocrem aliquam rationem teneat: resistentia pariter, inter
limites in constructione Problematis & Corollario superiore positos,
mediocrem rationem tenebit.

_Corol. 4._ Cum corpora tarda paulo magis resistantur quam pro ratione
duplicata velocitatis: hæc describendo longitudinem quamvis CZ amittent
majorem motus sui partem, quam quæ sit ad motum suum totum ut CT ad CR.

_Corol. 5._ Cognita autem resistentia corporum celerrimorum, innotescet
etiam resistentia tardorum; si modo lex decrementi resistentiæ pro ratione
velocitatis inveniri potest.

Prop. XXXVII. Prob. IX.

    _Aquæ de vase dato per foramen effluentis definire motum._

Si vas impleatur aqua, & in fundo perforetur ut aqua per foramen defluat,
manifestum est quod vas sustinebit pondus aquæ totius, dempto pondere
partis illius quod foramini perpendiculariter imminet. Nam si foramen
obstaculo aliquo occluderetur, obstaculum sustineret pondus aquæ sibi
perpendiculariter incumbentis, & fundum vasis sustineret pondus aquæ
reliquæ. Sublato autem obstaculo, fundum vasis eadem aquæ pressione eodemve
ipsius pondere urgebitur ac prius; & pondus quod obstaculum sustinebat, cum
jam non sustineatur, faciet ut aqua descendat & per foramen defluat.

Unde consequens est, quod motus aquæ totius effluentis is erit quem pondus
aquæ foramini perpendiculariter incumbentis generare possit. Nam aquæ
particula unaquæque pondere suo, quatenus non impeditur, descendit, idque
motu uniformiter accelerato; & quatenus impeditur, urgebit obstaculum.
Obstaculum illud vel vasis est fundum, vel aqua inferior defluens; &
propterea ponderis pars illa, quam vasis fundum non sustinet, urgebit aquam
defluentem & motum sibi proportionalem generabit.

Designet igitur F aream foraminis, A altitudinem aquæ foramini
perpendiculariter incumbentis, P pondus ejus, AF quantitatem ejus, S
spatium quod dato quovis tempore T in vacuo libere cadendo describeret, & V
velocitatem quam in fine temporis illius cadendo acquisierit: & motus ejus
acquisitus AF × V æqualis erit motui aquæ totius eodem tempore effluentis.
Sit velocitas quacum effluendo exit de foramine, ad velocitatem V ut d ad
e; & cum aqua velocitate V describere posset spatium 2S, aqua effluens
eodem tempore, velocitate sua {d ÷ e}V describere posset spatium {2d ÷ e}S.
Et propterea columna aquæ cujus longitudo sit {2d ÷ e}S & latitudo eadem
quæ foraminis, posset eo tempore defluendo egredi de vase, hoc est columna
{2d ÷ e}SF. Quare motus {2dd ÷ ee}SFV, qui fiet ducendo quantitatem aquæ
effluentis in velocitatem suam, hoc est motus omnis tempore effluxus illius
genitus, æquabitur motui AF × V. Et si æquales illi motus applicentur ad
FV; fiet {2dd ÷ ee}S æqualis A. Unde est dd ad ee ut A ad 2S, & d ad e in
dimidiata ratione ½A ad S. Est igitur velocitas quacum aqua exit e
foramine, ad velocitatem quam aqua cadens, & tempore T cadendo describens
spatium S acquireret, ut altitudo aquæ foramini perpendiculariter
incumbentis, ad medium proportionale inter altitudinem illam duplicatam &
spatium illud S, quod corpus tempore T cadendo describeret.

Igitur si motus illi sursum vertantur; quoniam aqua velocitate V ascenderet
ad altitudinem illam S de qua deciderat; & altitudines (uti notum est) sint
in duplicata ratione velocitatum: aqua effluens ascenderet ad altitudinem
½A. Et propterea quantitas aquæ effluentis; quo tempore corpus cadendo
describere posset altitudinem ½A, æqualis erit columnæ aquæ totius AF
foramini perpendiculariter imminentis.

Cum autem aqua effluens, motu suo sursum verso, perpendiculariter surgeret
ad dimidiam altitudinem aquæ foramini incumbentis; consequens est quod si
egrediatur oblique per canalem in latus vasis, describet in spatiis non
resistentibus Parabolam cujus latus rectum est altitudo aquæ in vase supra
canalis orificium, & cujus diameter horizonti perpendicularis ab orificio
illo ducitur, atque ordinatim applicatæ parallelæ sunt axi canalis.

Hæc omnia de Fluido subtilissimo intelligenda sunt. Nam si aqua ex partibus
crassioribus constet, hæc tardius effluet quam pro ratione superius
assignata, præsertim si foramen angustum sit per quod effluit.

Denique si aqua per canalem horizonti parallelum egrediatur; quoniam fundum
vasis integrum est, & eadem aquæ incumbentis pressione ubique urgetur ac si
aqua non efflueret; vas sustinebit pondus aquæ totius, non obstante
effluxu, sed latus vasis de quo effluit non sustinebit pressionem illam
omnem, quam sustineret si aqua non efflueret. Tolletur enim pressio partis
illius ubi perforatur: quæ quidem pressio æqualis est ponderi columnæ aquæ,
cujus basis foramini æquatur & altitudo eadem est quæ aquæ totius supra
foramen. Et propterea si vas, ad modum corporis penduli, filo prælongo a
clavo suspendatur, hoc, si aqua in plagam quamvis secundum lineam
horizontalem effluit, recedet semper a perpendiculo in plagam contrariam.
Et par est ratio motus pilarum, quæ Pulvere tormentario madefacto
implentur, &, materia in flammam per foramen paulatim expirante, recedunt a
regione flammæ & in partem contrariam cum impetu feruntur.

Prop. XXXVIII. Theor. XXIX.

    _Corporum Sphæricorum in Mediis quibusque Fluidissimis resistentiam in
    anteriore superficie definire._

[Illustration]

Defluat aqua de vase Cylindrico ABCD, per canalem Cylindricum EFGH, in vas
inferius IKLM; & inde effluat per vasis marginem IM. Sit autem margo ille
ejusdem altitudinis cum vasis superioris fundo CD, eo ut aqua per totum
canalem uniformi cum motu descendat; & in medio canalis collocetur Globus
P, sitque PR altitudo aquæ supra Globum, & SR ejusdem altitudo supra fundum
vasis. Sustineatur autem Globus filo tenuissimo TV, lateribus canalis hinc
inde affixo. Et manifestum est per proportionem superiorem, quod quantitas
aquæ dato tempore defluentis erit ut amplitudo foraminis per quod defluit;
hoc est, si Globus tollatur, ut canalis orificium: sin Globus adsit, ut
spatium undique inter Globum & canalem. Nam velocitas aquæ defluentis (per
superiorem Propositionem) ea erit quam corpus cadendo, & casu suo
describendo dimidiam aquæ altitudinem SR, acquirere posset: adeoque eadem
est sive Globus tollatur, sive adsit. Et propterea aqua defluens erit ut
amplitudo spatii per quod transit. Certe transitus aquæ per spatium
angustius facilior esse nequit quam per spatium amplius, & propterea
velocitas ejus ubi Globus adest, non potest esse major quam cum tollitur:
ideoque major aquæ quantitas, ubi Globus adest, non effluet quam pro
ratione spatii per quod transit. Si aqua non sit liquor subtilissimus &
fluidissimus, hujus transitus per spatium angustius, ob crassitudinem
particularum, erit aliquanto tardior: at liquorem fluidissimum esse hic
supponimus. Igitur quantitas aquæ, cujus descensum Globus dato tempore
impedit, est ad quantitatem aquæ quæ, si Globus tolleretur, eodem tempore
descenderet, ut basis Cylindri circa Globum descripti ad orificium canalis;
sive ut quadratum diametri Globi ad quadratum diametri cavitatis canalis.
Et propterea quantitas aquæ cujus descensum Globus impedit, æqualis est
quantitati aquæ, quæ eodem tempore per foramen circulare in fundo vasis,
basi Cylindri illius æquale, descendere posset, & cujus descensus per fundi
partem quamvis circularem basi illi æqualem impeditur.

Jam vero pondus aquæ, quod vas & Globus conjunctim sustinent, est pondus
aquæ totius in vase, præter partem illam quæ aquam defluentem accelerat, &
ad ejus motum generandum sufficit, quæque, per Propositionem superiorem,
æqualis est ponderi columnæ aquæ cujus basis æquatur spatio inter Globum &
canalem per quod aqua defluit, & altitudo eadem cum altitudine aquæ supra
fundum vasis, per lineam SR designata. Vasis igitur fundum & Globus
conjunctim sustinent pondus aquæ totius in vase sibi ipsis
perpendiculariter imminentis. Unde cum fundum vasis sustineat pondus aquæ
sibi perpendiculariter imminentis, reliquum est ut Globus etiam sustineat
pondus aquæ sibi perpendiculariter imminentis. Globus quidem non sustinet
pondus aquæ illius stagnantis & sibi absque omni motu incumbentis, sed aquæ
defluenti resistendo impedit effectum tanti ponderis; adeoque vim aquæ
defluentis sustinet ponderi illi æqualem. Nam impedit descensum & effluxum
quantitatis aquæ quem pondus illud accurate efficeret si Globus tolleretur.
Aqua pondere suo, quatenus descensus ejus impeditur, urget obstaculum omne,
ideoque obstaculum, quatenus descensum aquæ impedit, vim sustinet æqualem
ponderi quo descensus ille efficeretur. Globus autem descensum quantitatis
aquæ impedit, quem pondus columnæ aquæ sibi perpendiculariter incumbentis
efficere posset; & propterea vim aquæ decurrentis sustinet ponderi illi
æqualem. Actio & reactio aquæ per motus Legem tertiam æquantur inter se, &
in plagas contrarias diriguntur. Actio Globi in aquam descendentem, ad ejus
descensum impediendum, in superiora dirigitur, & est ut descendendi motus
impeditus, eique tollendo adæquate sufficit: & propterea actio contraria
aquæ in Globum æqualis est vi quæ motum eundem vel tollere vel generare
possit, hoc est ponderi columnæ aquæ, quæ Globo perpendiculariter imminet &
cujus altitudo est RS.

Si jam canalis orificium superius obstruatur, sic ut aqua descendere
nequeat, Globus quidem, pondere aquæ in canali & vase inferiore IKLM
stagnantis, premetur undique; sed non obstante pressione illa, si ejusdem
sit specificæ gravitatis cum aqua, quiescet. Pressio illa Globum nullam in
partem impellet. Et propterea ubi canalis aperitur & aqua de vase superiore
descendit, vis omnis, qua Globus impellitur deorsum, orietur ab aquæ illius
descensu, atque adeo æqualis erit ponderi columnæ aquæ, cujus altitudo est
RS & diameter eadem quæ Globi. Pondus autem istud, quo tempore data
quælibet aquæ quantitas, per foramen basi Cylindri circa Globum descripti
æquale, sublato Globo effluere posset, sufficit ad ejus motum omnem
generandum; atque adeo quo tempore aqua in Cylindro uniformiter decurrendo
describit duas tertias partes diametri Globi, sufficit ad motum omnem aquæ
Globo æqualis generandum. Nam Cylindrus aquæ, latitudine Globi & duabus
tertiis partibus altitudinis descriptus, Globo æquatur. Et propterea aquæ
currentis impetus in Globum quiescentem, quo tempore aqua currendo
describit duas tertias partes diametri Globi, si uniformiter continuetur,
generaret motum omnem partis Fluidi quæ Globo æquatur.

Quæ vero de aqua in canali demonstrata sunt, intelligenda sunt etiam de
aqua quacunque fluente, qua Globus quilibet in ea quiescens urgetur. Quæque
de aqua demonstrata sunt obtinent etiam in Fluidis universis subtilissimis.
De his omnibus idem valet argumentum.

Jam vero per Legum Corol. 5, vis Fluidi in Globum eadem est, sive Globus
quiescat & Fluidum uniformi cum velocitate moveatur, sive Fluidum quiescat
& Globus eadem cum velocitate in partem contrariam pergat. Et propterea
resistentia Globi in Medio quocunque Fluidissimo uniformiter progredientis,
quo tempore Globus duas tertias partes diametri suæ describit, æqualis est
vi, quæ in corpus ejusdem magnitudinis cum Globo & ejusdem densitatis cum
Medio uniformiter impressa, quo tempore Globus duas tertias partes diametri
suæ progrediendo describit, velocitatem Globi in corpore illo generare
posset. Tanta est resistentia Globi in superficiei parte præcedente.
_Q. E. I._

_Corol. 1._ Si solidum Sphæricum in ejusdem secum densitatis Fluido
subtilissimo libere moveatur, & inter movendum eadem vi urgeatur a tergo
atque cum quiescit; ejusdem resistentia ea erit quam in Corollario secundo
Propositionis xxxvi. descripsimus. Unde si computus ineatur, patebit quod
solidum dimidiam motus sui partem prius amittet, quam progrediendo
descripserit longitudinem diametri propriæ; Quod si inter movendum minus
urgeatur a tergo, magis retardabitur: & contra, si magis urgeatur, minus
retardabitur.

_Corol. 2._ Hallucinantur igitur qui credunt resistentiam projectilium per
infinitam divisionem partium Fluidi in infinitum diminui. Si Fluidum sit
valde crassum, minuetur resistentia aliquantulum per divisionem partium
ejus. At postquam competentem Fluiditatis gradum acquisiverit, (qualis
forte est Fluiditas Aeris vel aquæ vel argenti vivi) resistentia in
anteriore superficie solidi, per ulteriorem partium divisionem non multum
minuetur. Nunquam enim minor futura est quam pro limite quem in Corollario
superiore assignavimus.

_Corol. 3._ Media igitur in quibus corpora projectilia sine sensibili motus
diminutione longissime progrediuntur, non solum Fluidissima sunt, sed etiam
longe rariora quam sunt corpora illa quæ in ipsis moventur: nisi forte quis
dixerit Medium omne Fluidissimum, impetu perpetuo in posticam projectilis
partem facto, tantum promovere motum ejus quantum impedit & resistit in
parte antica. Et motus quidem illius, quem projectile imprimit in Medium,
partem aliquam a Medio circulariter lato reddi corpori a tergo verisimile
est. Nam & experimentis quibusdam factis, reperi quod in Fluidis satis
compressis pars aliqua redditur. Omnem vero in casu quocunque reddi nec
rationi consentaneum videtur, neque cum experimentis hactenus a me tentatis
bene quadrat. Fluidorum enim utcunque subtilium, si densa sint, vim ad
solida movenda resistendaque permagnam esse, & quomodo vis illius quantitas
per experimenta determinetur, plenius patebit per Propositiones duas quæ
sequuntur.

Lemma IV.

    _Si vas Sphæricum Fluido homogeneo quiescente plenum a vi impressa
    moveatur in directum, motuque progessivo semper accelerato ita pergat
    ut interea non moveatur in orbem: partes Fluidi inclusi, æqualiter
    participando motum vasis, quiescent inter se. Idem obtinebit in vase
    figuræ cujuscunque. Res manifesta est, nec indiget demonstratione._

Prop. XXXIX. Theor. XXX.

    _Fluidum omne quod motu accelerato ad modum venti increbescentis
    progreditur, & cujus partes inter se quiescunt, rapit omnia ejusdem
    densitatis innatantia corpora, & secum cum eadem velocitate defert._

Nam per Lemma superius si vas Sphæricum, rigidum, Fluidoque homogeneo
quiescente plenum, motu paulatim impresso progrediatur; Fluidi motum vasis
participantis partis omnes semper quiescent inter se. Ergo si Fluidi partes
aliquæ congelarentur, pergerent hæ quiescere inter partes reliquas. Nam
quoniam partes omnes quiescunt inter se, perinde est sive fluidæ sint, sive
aliquæ earum rigescant. Ergo si vas a vi aliqua extrinsecus impressa
moveatur, & motum suum imprimat in Fluidum; Fluidum quoque motum suum
imprimet in sui ipsius partes congelatas easque secum rapiet. Sed partes
illæ congelatæ sunt corpora solida ejusdem densitates cum Fluido; & par est
ratio Fluidi, sive id in vase moto claudatur, sive in spatiis liberis ad
modum venti spiret. Ergo Fluidum omne quod motu progressivo accelerato
fertur, & cujus partes inter se quiescunt, solida quæcunque ejusdem
densitatis inclusa, quæ sub initio quiescebant, rapit secum, & una moveri
cogit.   _Q. E. D._

Prop. XL. Prob. X.

    _Invenire resistentiam solidorum Sphæricorum in Mediis Fluidissimis
    densitate datis._

In Fluido quocunque dato inveniatur resistentia ultima solidi specie dati,
cujus magnitudo in infinitum augetur. Dein dic: ut ejus motus amissus, quo
tempore progrediendo longitudinem semidiametri suæ describit, est ad ejus
motum totum sub initio, ita motus quem solidum quodvis datum, in Fluido
eodem jam facto subtilissimo, describendo diametri suæ longitudinem
amitteret, est ad ejus motum totum sub initio quamproxime. Nam si particulæ
minimæ Fluidi subtiliati eandem habeant proportionem eundemque situm ad
solidum datum in eo movens, quem particulæ totidem minimæ Fluidi non
subtiliati habent ad solidum auctum; sintque particulæ Fluidi utriusq;
summe lubricæ, & viribus centrifugis centripetisque omnino destituantur;
incipiant autem solida temporibus quibuscunque proportionalibus in his
Fluidis similiter moveri: pergent eadem similiter moveri, adeoque quo
tempore describunt spatia semidiametris suis æqualia, amittent partes
motuum proportionales totis; idque licet partes Medii subtiliati minuantur,
& magnitudo solidi in Medio non subtiliato moventis augeatur in infinitum.
Ergo ex resistentia solidi aucti in Medio non subtiliato, dabitur per
proportionem superiorem resistentia solidi non aucti in Medio subtiliato.
_Q. E. I._

Si particulæ non sunt summe lubricæ, supponendum est quod in utroq; Fluido
sunt æqualiter lubricæ, eo ut ex defectu lubricitatis resistentia utrinq;
æqualiter augeatur: & Propositio etiamnum valebit.

_Corol. 1._ Ergo si ex aucta solidi Sphærici magnitudine augeatur ejus
resistentia in ratione duplicata, resistentia solidi Sphærici dati ex
diminuta magnitudine particularum Fluidi, nullatenus minuetur.

_Corol. 2._ Sin resistentia, augendo solidum Sphæricum, augeatur in minore
quam duplicata ratione diametri; eadem diminuendo particulas Fluidi,
diminuetur in ratione qua resistentia aucta deficit a ratione duplicata
diametri.

_Corol. 3._ Unde perspicuum est quod solidi dati resistentia per divisionem
partium Fluidi non multum diminui potest. Nam resistentia solidi aucti
debebit esse quam proxime ut quantitas materiæ fluidæ resistentis, quam
solidum illud movendo protrudit & a locis a se invasis & occupatis
propellit: hoc est ut spatium Cylindricum per quod solidum movetur, adeoque
in duplicata ratione semidiametri solidi quamproxime.

_Corol. 4._ Igitur propositis duobus Fluidis, quorum alterum ab altero
quoad vim resistendi longissime superatur: Fluidum quod minus resistit est
altero rarius; suntque Fluidorum omnium vires resistendi prope ut eorum
densitates; præsertim si solida sint magna, & velociter moveantur, &
Fluidorum æqualis sit compressio.

_Scholium Generale._

Quæ hactenus demonstrata sunt tentavi in hunc modum. Globum ligneum pondere
unciarum _Romanarum_ 57-7/22, diametro digitorum _Londinensium_ 6-7/8
fabricatum, filo tenui ab unco satis firmo suspendi, ita ut inter uncum &
centrum oscillationis Globi distantia esset pedum 10½. In filo punctum
notavi pedibus decem & uncia una a centro suspensionis distans; & e regione
puncti illius collocavi Regulam in digitos distinctam, quorum ope notarem
longitudines arcuum a Pendulo descriptas. Deinde numeravi oscillationes
quibus Globus quartam motus sui partem amitteret. Si pendulum deducebatur a
perpendiculo ad distantiam duorum digitorum, & inde demittebatur; ita ut
toto suo descensu describeret arcum duorum digitorum, totaque oscillatione
prima, ex descensu & ascensu subsequente composita, arcum digitorum fere
quatuor; idem oscillationibus 164 amisit octavam motus sui partem, sic ut
ultimo suo ascensu describeret arcum digiti unius cum tribus partibus
quartis digiti. Si primo descensu descripsit arcum digitorum quatuor,
amisit octavam motus partem oscillationibus 121; ita ut ascensu ultimo
describeret arcum digitorum 3½. Si primo descensu descripsit arcum
digitorum octo, sexdecim, triginta duorum vel sexaginta quatuor, amisit
octavam motus partem oscillationibus 69, 35½, 18½, 9-2/3, respective.
Igitur differentia inter arcus descensu primo & ascensu ultimo descriptos,
erat in casu primo, secundo, tertio, quarto, quinto, sexto, digitorum ¼, ½,
1, 2, 4, 8 respective. Dividantur eæ differentiæ per numerum oscillationum
in casu unoquoque; & in oscillatione una mediocri, qua arcus digitorum 3¾,
7½, 15, 30, 60, 120 descriptus fuit, differentia arcuum descensu &
subsequente ascensu descriptorum, erit 1/656, 1/242, 1/69, 4/71, 8/37,
24/29 partes digiti respective. Hæ autem in majoribus oscillationibus sunt
in duplicata ratione arcuum descriptorum quam proxime; in minoribus vero
paulo majores quam in ea ratione, & propterea (per Corol. 2. Prop. xxxi.
Libri hujus) resistentia Globi, ubi celerius movetur, est in duplicata
ratione velocitatis quamproxime; ubi tardius, paulo major quam in ea
ratione: omnino ut in Corollariis Propositionis xxxii. demonstratum est.

Designet jam V velocitatem maximam in oscillatione quavis, sintque A, B, C
quantitates datæ, & fingamus quod differentia arcuum sit AV + BV^{3/2} +
CV^2. Et cum velocitates maximæ in prædictis sex Casibus, sint ut arcuum
dimidiorum 1-7/8, 3¾, 7½, 15, 30, 60 chordæ, atque adeo ut arcus ipsi
quamproxime, hoc est ut numeri ½, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16: scribamus in Casu secundo
quarto & sexto numeros 1, 4, & 16 pro V; & prodibit arcuum differentia
1/242 æqualis A + B + C in Casu secundo; & 2 ÷ 35½ æqualis 4A + 8B + 16C in
casu quarto; & 8 ÷ 9-2/3 æqualis 16A + 64B + 256C in casu sexto. Unde si
per has æquationes determinemus quantitates A, B, C; habebimus Regulam
inveniendi differentiam arcuum pro velocitate quacunque data.

Cæterum cum velocitates maximæ sint in Cycloide ut arcus oscillando
descripti, in circulo vero ut semissium arcuum illorum chordæ, adeoque
paribus arcubus majores sint in Cycloide quam in circulo, in ratione
semissium arcuum ad eorundem chordas; tempora autem in circulo sint majora
quam in Cycloide in velocitatis ratione reciproca: ut ex resistentia in
circulo inveniatur resistentia in Trochoide, debebit resistentia augeri in
duplicata circiter ratione arcus ad chordam, ob velocitatem in ratione illa
simplici auctam; & diminui in ratione chordæ ad arcum, ob tempus (seu
durationem resistentiæ qua arcuum differentia prædicta generatur) diminutum
in eadem ratione: id est (si rationes conjungamus) debebit resistentia
augeri in ratione arcus ad chordam circiter. Hæc ratio in casu secundo est
6283 ad 6279, in quarto 12566 ad 12533, in sexto 25132 ad 24869. Et inde
resistentia 1 ÷ 242, 2 ÷ 35½, & 8 ÷ 9-2/3 evadunt 6283 ÷ {6279 × 242},
25132 ÷ {12533 × 35½} & 201056 ÷ {24869 × 9-2/3}, id est in numeris
decimalibus 0,004135, 0,056486 & 0,8363. Unde prodeunt æquationes A + B + C
= 0,004135: 4A + 8B + 16C = 0,05648 & 16A + 64B + 256C = 0,8363. Et ex his
per debitam terminorum collationem & reductionem Analyticam fit A =
0,0002097, B = 0,0008955 & C = 0,0030298. Est igitur differentia arcuum ut
0,0002097V + 0,0008955V^{3/2} + 0,0030298V^2: & propterea cum per Corol.
Prop. xxx. resistentia Globi in medio arcus oscillando descripti, ubi
velocitas est V, sit ad ipsius pondus ut 7/11AV + 16/23BV^{3/2} + ¾CV^2 ad
longitudinem Penduli; si pro A, B, & C scribantur numeri inventi, fiet
resistentia Globi ad ejus pondus, ut 0,0001334V + 0,000623V^{3/2} +
0,00227235V^2 ad longitudinem Penduli inter centrum suspensionis & Regulam,
id est ad 121 digitos. Unde cum V in casu secundo designet 1, in quarto 4,
in sexto 16: erit resistentia ad pondus Globi in casu secundo ut 0.003029
ad 121, in quarto ut 0.042875 ad 121, in sexto ut 0.63013 ad 121.

Arcus quem punctum in filo notatum in Casu sexto descripsit, erat 120 - {8
÷ 9-2/3} seu 119-5/29 digitorum. Et propterea cum radius esset 121
digitorum, & longitudo penduli inter punctum suspensionis & centrum Globi
esset 126 digitorum, arcus quem centrum Globi descripsit erat 124-3/31
digitorum. Quoniam corporis oscillantis velocitas maxima ob resistentiam
Aeris non incidit in punctum infimum arcus descripti, sed in medio fere
loco arcus totius versatur: hæc eadem erit circiter ac si Globus descensu
suo toto in Medio non resistente describeret arcus illius partem dimidiam
digitorum 62-3/62; idque in Cycloide, ad quam motum penduli supra
reduximus: & propterea velocitas illa æqualis erit velocitati quam Globus,
perpendiculariter cadendo & casu suo describendo altitudinem arcus illius
Sinui verso æqualem, acquirere posset. Est autem sinus ille versus in
Cycloide ad arcum istum 62-3/62 ut arcus idem ad penduli longitudinem
duplam 252, & propterea æqualis digitis 15,278. Quare velocitas ea ipsa est
quam corpus cadendo & casu suo spatium 15,278 digitorum describendo
acquirere posset. Unde cum corpus tempore minuti unius secundi cadendo (uti
per experimenta pendulorum determinavit _Hugenius_) describat pedes
_Parisienses_ 15-1/12, id est pedes _Anglicos_ 16-11/24 seu digitos 197½, &
tempora sint in dimidiata ratione spatiorum; Globus tempore minut.
16^{tert.} 38^{quart.} cadendo describet 15,278 digitos, & velocitatem suam
prædictam acquiret; & propterea cum eadem velocitate uniformiter continuata
describet eodem tempore longitudinem duplam 30,556 digitorum. Tali igitur
cum velocitate Globus resistentiam patitur, quæ sit ad ejus pondus ut
0,63013 ad 121, vel (si resistentiæ pars illa sola spectetur quæ est in
velocitatis ratione duplicata) ut 0,58172 ad 121.

Experimento autem Hydrostatico inveni quod pondus Globi hujus lignei esset
ad pondus Globi aquei magnitudinis ejusdem, ut 55 ad 97: & propterea cum
121 sit ad 213,4 in eadem ratione, erit resistentia Globi aquei præfata cum
velocitate progredientis ad ipsius pondus ut 0,58172 ad 213,4, id est ut 1
ad 366-5/6. Unde cum pondus Globi aquei, quo tempore Globus cum velocitate
uniformiter continuata describat longitudinem pedum 30,556, velocitatem
illam omnem in Globo cadente generare posset; manifestum est quod vis
resistentiæ uniformiter continuata tollere posset velocitatem minorem in
ratione 1 ad 366-5/6, hoc est velocitatis totius partem 1 ÷ 366-5/6. Et
propterea quo tempore Globus, ea cum velocitate uniformiter continuata,
longitudinem semidiametri suæ seu digitorum 3-7/16 describere posset, eodem
amitteret motus sui partem 1/3262.

Numerabam etiam oscillationes quibus pendulum quartam motus sui partem
amisit. In sequente Tabula numeri supremi denotant longitudinem arcus
descensu primo descripti, in digitis & partibus digiti expressam: numeri
medii significant longitudinem arcus ascensu ultimo descripti; & loco
infimo stant numeri oscillationum. Experimentum descripsi tanquam magis
accuratum quam cum motus pars tantum octava amitteretur. Calculum tentet
qui volet.

  Descensus Primus    2     4    8       16       32      64
  Ascensus ultimus  1-1/2   3    6       12       24      48
  Num. Oscillat.     374   272 162-1/2  83-1/3  41-2/3  22-2/3

Postea Globum plumbeum, diametro digitorum duorum & pondere unciarum
Romanarum 26¼ suspendi filo eodem, sic ut inter centrum Globi & punctum
suspensionis intervallum esset pedum 10½, & numerabam oscillationes quibus
data motus pars amitteretur. Tabularum subsequentium prior exhibet numerum
oscillationum quibus pars octava motus totius cessavit; secunda numerum
oscillationum quibus ejusdem pars quarta amissa fuit.

  Descensus primus     1      2     4     8    16     32    64
  Ascensus ultimus   7/8    7/4  3-1/2    7    14     28    56
  Numerus Oscillat.  226    228   193   140  90-1/2   53    30

  Descensus primus     1      2     4     8    16     32    64
  Ascensus ultimus   3/4   1-1/2    3     6    12     24    48
  Numerus Oscillat.  510    518   420   318   204    121    70

In Tabula priore seligendo ex observationibus tertiam, quintam & septimam,
& exponendo velocitates maximas in his observationibus particulatim per
numeros 1, 4, 16 respective, & generaliter per quantitatem V ut supra:
emerget in observatione prima 2/193 = A + B + C, in secunda 2 ÷ 90½ = 4A +
8B + 16C, in tertia 8/30 æqu. 16A + 64B + 256C. Quæ æquationes per
reductiones superius expositas dant, A = 0,000145, B = 0,000247 & C =
0,0009. Et inde prodit resistentia Globi cum velocitate V moventis, in ea
ratione ad pondus suum unciarum 26¼, quam habet 0,000923V + 0,000172V^{3/2}
+ 0,000675V^2 ad Penduli longitudinem 121 digitorum. Et si spectemus eam
solummodo resistentiæ partem quæ est in duplicata ratione velocitatis, hæc
erit ad pondus Globi ut 0,000675V^2 ad 121 digitos. Erat autem hæc pars
resistentiæ in experimento primo ad pondus Globi lignei unciarum 57-7/22 ut
0,00227235V^2 ad 121: & inde fit resistentia Globi lignei ad resistentiam
Globi plumbei (paribus eorum velocitatibus) ut 57-7/22 in 0,00227235 ad 26¼
in 0,000675, id est ut 130309 ad 17719 seu 7-1/3 ad 1. Diametri Globorum
duorum erant 6-7/8 & 2 digitorum, & harum quadrata sunt ad invicem ut 47¼ &
4, seu 11-13/16 & 1 quamproxime. Ergo resistentiæ Globorum æquivelocium
erant in minore ratione quam duplicata diametrorum. At nondum
consideravimus resistentiam fili, quæ certe permagna erat, ac de pendulorum
inventa resistentia subduci debet. Hanc accurate definire non potui, sed
majorem tamen inveni quam partem tertiam resistentiæ totius minoris
penduli, & inde didici quod resistentiæ Globorum, dempta fili resistentia,
sunt quamproxime in dimidiata ratione diametrorum. Nam ratio 7-1/3 - 1/3 ad
1 - 1/3, id est 7 ad 2/3 seu 10½ ad 1, non longe abest a diametrorum
ratione duplicata 11-13/16 ad 1.

Cum resistentia fili in Globis majoribus minoris sit momenti, tentavi etiam
experimentum in Globo cujus diameter erat 18¼ digitorum. Longitudo penduli
inter punctum suspensionis & centrum oscillationis erat digitorum 122¾
inter punctum suspensionis & nodum in filo 109½ dig. Arcus primo penduli
descensu a nodo descriptus, 32 dig. arcus ascensu ultimo post oscillationes
quinque ab eodem nodo descriptus, 28 dig. Summa arcuum seu arcus totus
oscillatione mediocri descriptus, 30 dig. Differentia arcuum 4 dig. Ejus
pars decima seu differentia inter descensum & ascensum in oscillatione
mediocri 2/5 dig. Ut radius 109½ ad radium 122½, ita arcus totus 60 dig.
oscillatione mediocri a Nodo descriptus, ad arcum totum 67-1/8,
oscillatione mediocri a centro Globi descriptum: & ita differentia 2/5 ad
differentiam novam 0,4475. Si longitudo penduli, manente longitudine arcus
descripti, augeretur in ratione 126 ad 122½, velocitas ejus diminueretur in
ratione illa dimidiata; & arcuum descensu & subsequente ascensu
descriptorum differentia 0,4475 diminueretur in ratione velocitatis,
adeoque evaderet 0,4412. Deinde si arcus descriptus augeretur in ratione
67-1/8 ad 124-3/31, differentia ista 0,4412 augeretur in duplicata illa
ratione, adeoque, evaderet 1,509. Hæc ita se haberent, ex hypothesi quod
resistentia Penduli esset in duplicata ratione velocitatis. Ergo si
pendulum describeret arcum totum 124-3/31 digitorum, & longitudo ejus inter
punctum suspensionis & centrum oscillationis esset 126 digitorum,
differentia arcuum descensu & subsequente ascensu descriptorum foret 1,509
dig. Et hæc differentia ducta in pondus Globi penduli, quod erat unciarum
208, producit 313,9. Rursus ubi pendulum superius ex Globo ligneo
constructum, centro oscillationis, quod a puncto suspensionis digitos 126
distabat, describebat arcum totum 124-3/31 digitorum, differentia arcuum
descensu & ascensu descriptorum fuit 126/121 in 8 ÷ 9-2/3 seu 25/29, quæ
ducta in pondus Globi, quod erat unciarum 57-7/22, producit 48,55. Duxi
autem differentias hasce in pondera Globorum ut invenirem eorum
resistentias. Nam differentiæ oriuntur ex resistentiis, suntque ut
resistentiæ directe & pondera inverse. Sunt igitur resistentiæ ut numeri
313,9 & 48,55. Pars autem resistentiæ Globi minoris, quæ est in duplicata
ratione velocitatis, erat ad resistentiam totam ut 0,58172 ad 0,63013, id
est ut 44,4 ad 48,55; & pars resistentiæ Globi majoris propemodum æquatur
ipsius resistentiæ toti, adeoque partes illæ sunt ut 313,9 & 44,4
quamproxime, id est ut 7,07 ad 1. Sunt autem Globorum diametri 10¾ & 6-7/8;
& harum quadrata 351½ & 47-17/64 sunt ut 7,438 & 1, id est ut Globorum
resistentiæ 7,07 & 1 quamproxime. Differentia rationum haud major est quam
quæ ex fili resistentia oriri potuit. Igitur resistentiarum partes illæ quæ
sunt (paribus Globis) ut quadrata velocitatum, sunt etiam (paribus
velocitatibus) ut quadrata diametrorum Globorum; & propterea (per
Corollaria Prop. XL. Libri hujus) resistentia quam Globi majores &
velociores in aere movendo sentiunt, haud multum per infinitam aeris
divisionem & subtiliationem diminui potest, proindeque Media omnia in
quibus corpora multo minus resistuntur, sunt aere rariora.

Cæterum Globorum, quibus usus sum in his experimentis, maximus non erat
perfecte Sphæricus, & propterea in calculo hic allato minutias quasdam
brevitatis gratia neglexi; de calculo accurato in experimento non satis
accurato minime sollicitus. Optarim itaque (cum demonstratio vacui ex his
dependeat) ut experimenta cum Globis & pluribus & majoribus & magis
accuratis tentarentur. Si Globi sumantur in proportione Geometrica, puta
quorum diametri sint digitorum 4, 8, 16, 32; ex progressione experimentorum
colligetur quid in Globis adhuc majoribus evenire debeat.

Jam vero conferendo resistentias diversorum fluidorum inter se tentavi
sequentia. Arcam ligneam paravi longitudine pedum quatuor, latitudine &
altitudine pedis unius. Hanc operculo nudatam implevi aqua fontana, fecique
ut immersa pendula in medio aquæ oscillando moverentur. Globus autem
plumbeus pondere 166-1/6 unciarum, diametro 3-5/8 digitorum, movebatur ut
in Tabula sequente descripsimus, existente videlicet longitudine penduli a
puncto suspensionis ad punctum quoddam in filo notatum 126 digitorum, ad
oscillationis autem centrum 134-1/8 digitorum.

  Arcus descensu primo a
  puncto in filo notato    64  32   16    8    4    2    1    1/2    1/4
  descriptus digitorum.

  Arcus ascensu ultimo     48  24   12    6    3  1-1/2 3/4   3/8    3/16
  descriptus digitorum.

  Arcuum differentia motui
  amisso proportionalis,   16   8    4    2    1   1/2  1/4   1/8    1/16
  digitorum.

  Numerus oscillationum            29/60 1-1/5 3   7  11-1/4 12-2/3 13-1/3
  in aqua.

  Numerus oscillationum  85-1/2     287  535
  in aere.

In experimento columnæ quartæ, motus æquales oscillationibus 535 in aere, &
1-1/5 in aqua amissi sunt. Erant autem oscillationes in aere paulo
celeriores quam in aqua, nimirum in ratione 44 ad 41. Nam 14-2/3
oscillationes in aqua, & 13-2/3 in aere simul peragebantur. Et propterea si
oscillationes in aqua in ea ratione accelerarentur ut motus pendulorum in
Medio utroque fierent æquiveloces, numerus oscillationum 1-1/5 in aqua,
quibus motus idem ac prius amitteretur (ob resistentiam auctam in ratione
illa duplicata & tempus diminutum in ratione eadem simplici) diminueretur
in eadem illa ratione 44 ad 41, adeoque evaderet 1-1/5 in 41/44 seu
123/110. Paribus igitur Pendulorum velocitatibus motus æquales in aere
oscillationibus 535 & in aqua oscillationibus 123/110 amissi sunt; ideoque
resistentia penduli in aqua est ad ejus resistentiam in aere ut 535 ad
123/110. Hæc est proportio resistentiarum totarum in Casu columnæ quartæ.

Designet jam AV + CV^2 resistentiam Globi in aere cum velocitate V
moventis, & cum velocitas maxima, in Casu columnæ, quartæ sit ad
velocitatem maximam in casu columnæ primæ ut 1 ad 8, & resistentia in Casu
columnæ quartæ ad resistentiam in Casu columnæ primæ in ratione arcuum
differentiæ in his casibus, ad numeros oscillationum applicatæ, id est ut
2/535 ad 16 ÷ 85½ seu ut 85½ ad 4280: scribamus in his Casibus 1 & 8 pro
velocitatibus, atque 85½ & 4280 pro resistentiis, & fiet A + C = 85½ & 8A +
64C = 4280 seu A + 8C = 535, indeque per reductionem æquationum proveniet
7C = 449½ & C = 64-3/14 & A = 21-2/7; atque adeo resistentia ut 21-2/7V +
64-3/14V^2 quamproxime. Quare in Casu columnæ quartæ ubi velocitas erat 1,
resistentia tota est ad partem suam quadrato velocitatis proportionalem, ut
21-2/7 + 64-3/14 seu 85½, ad 64-3/14; & idcirco resistentia penduli in aqua
est ad resistentiæ partem illam in aere quæ quadrato velocitatis
proportionalis est, quæque sola in motibus velocioribus consideranda venit,
ut 85½ ad 64-3/14 & 535 ad 123/110 conjunctim, id est ut 637 ad 1. Si
penduli in aqua oscillantis filum totum fuisset immersum, resistentia ejus
fuisset adhuc major; adeo ut penduli in aere oscillantis resistentia illa
quæ velocitatis quadrato proportionalis est, quæque sola in corporibus
velocioribus consideranda venit, sit ad resistentiam ejusdem penduli
totius, eadem cum velocitate in aqua oscillantis, ut 800 vel 900 ad 1
circiter, hoc est ut densitas aquæ ad densitatem aeris quamproxime.

In hoc calculo sumi quoque deberet pars illa resistentiæ penduli in aqua,
quæ esset ut quadratum velocitatis, sed (quod mirum forte videatur)
resistentia in aqua augebatur in ratione velocitatis plusquam duplicata.
Ejus rei causam investigando, in hanc incidi, quod Arca nimis angusta esset
pro magnitudine Globi penduli, & motum aquæ cedentis præ angustia sua nimis
impediebat. Nam si Globus pendulus, cujus diameter erat digiti unius,
immergeretur, resistentia augebatur in duplicata ratione velocitatis
quamproxime. Id tentabam construendo pendulum ex Globis duobus, quorum
inferior & minor oscillaretur in aqua, superior & major proxime supra aquam
filo affixus esset, & in Aere oscillando, adjuvaret motum penduli eumque
diuturniorem redderet. Experimenta autem hoc modo instituta se habebant ut
in Tabula sequente describitur.

  Arcus descensu primo descriptus  16     8      4       2    1  1/2 1/4
  Arcus ascensu ultimo descriptus. 12     6      3     1-1/2 3/4 3/8 3/16
  Arcuum diff. motui amisso
                    proportionalis  4     2      1       1/2 1/4 1/8 1/16
  Numerus Oscillationum           3-3/8 6-1/2 12-1/12 21-1/5 34  53 62-1/5

Resistentia hic nunquam augetur in ratione velocitatis plusquam duplicata.
Et idem in pendulo majore evenire verisimile est, si modo Arca augeatur in
ratione penduli. Debebit tamen resistentia tam in aere quam in aqua, si
velocitas per gradus in infinitum augeatur, augeri tandem in ratione paulo
plusquam duplicata, propterea quod in experimentis hic descriptis
resistentia minor est quam pro ratione de corporibus velocissimis in Libri
hujus Prop. xxxvi & xxxviii. demonstrata. Nam corpora longe velocissima
spatium a tergo relinquent vacuum, ideoque resistentia quam sentiunt in
partibus præcedentibus, nullatenus minuetur per pressionem Medii in
partibus posticis.

Conferendo resistentias Mediorum inter se, effeci etiam ut pendula ferrea
oscillarentur in argento vivo. Longitudo fili ferrei erat pedum quasi
trium, & diameter Globi penduli quasi tertia pars digiti. Ad filum autem
proxime supra Mercurium affixus erat Globus alius plumbeus satis magnus ad
motum penduli diutius continuandum. Tum vasculum, quod capiebat quasi
libras tres argenti vivi, implebam vicibus alternis argento vivo & aqua
communi, ut pendulo in Fluido utroque successive oscillante invenirem
proportionem resistentiarum: & prodiit resistentia argenti vivi ad
resistentiam aquæ ut 13 vel 14 ad 1 circiter: id est ut densitas argenti
vivi ad densitatem aquæ. Ubi Globum pendulum paulo majorem adhibebam, puta
cujus diameter esset quasi ½ vel 2/3 partes digiti, prodibat resistentia
argenti vivi in ea ratione ad resistentiam aquæ quam habet numerus 12 vel
10 ad 1 circiter. Sed experimento priori magis fidendum est, propterea quod
in his ultimis vas nimis angustum fuit pro magnitudine Globi immersi.
Ampliato Globo, deberet etiam vas ampliari. Constitueram quidem hujusmodi
experimenta in vasis majoribus & in liquoribus tum Metallorum fusorum, tum
aliis quibusdam tam calidis quam frigidis repetere: sed omnia experiri non
vacat, & ex jam descriptis satis liquet resistentiam corporum celeriter
motorum densitati Fluidorum in quibus moventur proportionalem esse
quamproxime. Non dico accurate. Nam Fluida tenaciora pari densitate
proculdubio magis resistunt quam liquidiora, ut oleum frigidum quam
calidum, calidum quam aqua pluvialis, aqua quam Spiritus vini. Verum in
liquoribus qui ad sensum satis fluidi sunt, ut in Aere, in aqua seu dulci
seu falsa, in Spiritibus vini, Terebinthi & Salium, in Oleo a foecibus per
destillationem liberato & calefacto, Oleoque Vitrioli & Mercurio, ac
Metallis liquefactis, & siqui sint alii, qui tam Fluidi sunt ut in vasis
agitati motum impressum diutius conservent, effusique liberrime in guttas
decurrendo resolvantur, nullus dubito quin regula allata satis accurate
obtineat: præsertim si experimenta in corporibus pendulis & majoribus &
velocius motis instituantur.

Quare cum Globus aqueus in aere movendo resistentiam patiatur qua motus sui
pars 1/3261, interea dum longitudinem semidiametri suæ describat (ut jam
ante ostensum est) tollatur, sitque densitas aeris ad densitatem aquæ ut
800 vel 850 ad 1 circiter, consequens est ut hæc Regula generaliter
obtineat. Si corpus quodlibet Sphæricum in Medio quocunque satis Fluido
moveatur, & spectetur resistentiæ pars illa sola quæ est in duplicata
ratione velocitatis, hæc pars erit ad vim quæ totum corporis motum, interea
dum corpus idem longitudinem duarum ipsius semidiametrorum motu illo
uniformiter continuato describat, vel tollere posset vel eundem generare,
ut densitas Medii ad densitatem corporis quamproxime. Igitur resistentia
quasi triplo major est quam pro lege in Corollario primo Propositionis
xxxviii. allata; & propterea partes quasi duæ tertiæ motus illius omnis
quem Globi partes anticæ movendo imprimunt in Medium, restituuntur in Globi
partes posticas a Medio in orbem redeunte, inque spatium irruente quod
Globus alias vacuum post se relinqueret. Unde si velocitas Globi eousque
augeatur ut Medium non posset adeo celeriter in spatium illud irruere, quin
aliquid vacui a tergo Globi semper relinquatur, resistentia tandem evadet
quasi triplo major quam pro Regula generali novissime posita.

Hactenus experimentis usi sumus oscillantium pendulorum, eo quod eorum
motus facilius & accuratius observari & mensurari possint. Motus autem
pendulorum in gyrum actorum & in orbem redeundo circulos describentium,
propterea quod sint uniformes & eo nomine ad investigandam resistentiam
datæ velocitati competentem longe aptiores videantur, in consilium etiam
adhibui. Faciendo enim ut pendulum circulariter latum duodecies
revolveretur, notavi magnitudines circulorum duorum, quos prima & ultima
revolutione descripsit. Et inde collegi velocitates corporis sub initio &
fine. Tum dicendo quod corpus, velocitate mediocri describendo circulos
duodecim mediocres, amitteret velocitatum illarum differentiam, collegi
resistentiam qua differentia illa eo omni corporis per circulos duodecim
itinere amitti posset; & resistentia inventa, quanquam hujus generis
experimenta minus accurate tentare licuit, probe tamen cum præcedentibus
congruebat.

Denique cum receptissima Philosophorum ætatis hujus opinio sit, Medium
quoddam æthereum & longe subtilissimum extare, quod omnes omnium corporum
poros & meatus liberrime permeet; a tali autem Medio per corporum poros
fluente resistentia oriri debeat: ut tentarem an resistentia, quam in motis
corporibus experimur, tota sit in eorum externa superficie, an vero partes
etiam internæ in superficiebus propriis resistentiam notabilem sentiant,
excogitavi experimentum tale. Filo pedum undecim longitudinis, ab unco
chalybeo satis firmo, mediante annulo chalybeo, suspendebam pyxidem
abiegnam rotundam, ad constituendum pendulum longitudinis prædictæ. Uncus
sursum præacutus erat acie concava, ut annulus arcu suo superiore aciei
innixus liberrime moveretur. Arcui autem inferiori annectebatur filum.
Pendulum ita constitutum deducebam a perpendiculo ad distantiam quasi pedum
sex, idque secundum planum aciei unci perpendiculare, ne annulus,
oscillante Pendulo, supra aciem unci ultro citroque laberetur. Nam punctum
suspensionis in quo annulus uncum tangit, immotum manere debet. Locum
igitur accurate notabam, ad quem deduxeram pendulum, dein pendulo demisso
notabam alia tria loca ad quæ redibat in fine oscillationis primæ, secundæ
ac tertiæ. Hoc repetebam sæpius, ut loca illa quam potui accuratissime
invenirem. Tum pyxidem plumbo & gravioribus, quæ ad manus erant, metallis
implebam. Sed prius ponderabam pyxidem vacuam, una cum parte fili quæ
circum pyxidem volvebatur ac dimidio partis reliquæ quæ inter uncum &
pyxidem pendulam tendebatur. (Nam filum tensum dimidio ponderis sui
pendulum a perpendiculo digressum semper urget.) Huic ponderi addebam
pondus aeris quam pyxis capiebat. Et pondus totum erat quasi pars
septuagesima octava pyxidis metallorum plenæ. Tum quoniam pyxis Metallorum
plena, pondere suo tendendo filum, augebat longitudinem penduli,
contrahebam filum ut penduli jam oscillantis eadem esset longitudo ac
prius. Dein pendulo ad locum primo notatum distracto ac dimisso, numerabam
oscillationes quasi septuaginta & septem, donec pyxis ad locum secundo
notatum rediret, totidemque subinde donec pyxis ad locum tertio notatum
rediret, atque rursus totidem donec pyxis reditu suo attingeret locum
quartum. Unde concludo quod resistentia tota pyxidis plenæ non majorem
habebat proportionem ad resistentiam pyxidis vacuæ quam 78 ad 77. Nam si
æquales essent ambarum resistentiæ, pyxis plena ob vim suam insitam
septuagies & octies majorem vi insita pyxidis vacui, motum suum
oscillatorium tanto diutius conservare deberet, atque adeo completis semper
oscillationibus 78 ad loca illa notata redire. Rediit autem ad eadem
completis oscillationibus 77.

Designet igitur A resistentiam pyxidis in ipsius superficie externa, & B
resistentiam pyxidis vacuæ in partibus internis; & si resistentiæ corporum
æquivelocium in partibus internis sint ut materia, seu numerus particularum
quæ resistuntur: erit 78B resistentia pyxidis plenæ in ipsius partibus
internis: adeoque pyxidis vacuæ resistentia tota A + B erit ad pyxidis
plenæ resistentiam totam A + 78B ut 77 ad 78, & divisim A + B ad 77B ut 77,
ad 1, indeque A + B ad B ut 77 × 77 ad 1, & divisim A ad B ut 5928 ad 1.
Est igitur resistentia pyxidis vacuæ in partibus internis quinquies millies
minor quam ejusdem resistentia in externa superficie, & amplius. Sic
disputamus ex hypothesi quod major illa resistentia pyxidis plenæ oriatur
ab actione Fluidi alicujus subtilis in Metallum inclusum. Ac causam longe
aliam esse opinor. Nam tempora oscillationum pyxidis plenæ minora sunt quam
tempora oscillationum pyxidis vacuæ, & propterea resistentia pyxidis plenæ
in externa superficie major est, pro ipsius velocitate & longitudine spatii
oscillando descripti, quam ea pyxidis vacuæ. Quod cum ita sit, resistentia
pyxidum in partibus internis aut nulla erit aut plane insensibilis.

Hoc experimentum recitavi memoriter. Nam charta, in qua illud aliquando
descripseram, intercidit. Unde fractas quasdam numerorum partes, quæ
memoria exciderunt, omittere compulsus sum. Nam omnia denuo tentare non
vacat. Prima vice, cum unco infirmo usus essem, pyxis plena citius
retardabatur. Causam quærendo, reperi quod uncus infirmus cedebat ponderi
pyxidis, & ejus oscillationibus obsequendo in partes omnes flectebatur.
Parabam igitur uncum firmum, ut punctum suspensionis immotum maneret, &
tunc omnia ita evenerunt uti supra descripsimus.

Eadem methodo qua invenimus resistentiam corporum Sphæricorum in Aqua &
argento vivo, inveniri potest resistentia corporum figurarum aliarum; & sic
Navium figuræ variæ in Typis exiguis constructæ inter se conferri, ut
quænam ad navigandum aptissimæ sint, sumptibus parvis tentetur.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. VIII.

_De Motu per Fluida propagato._

Prop. XLI. Theor. XXXI.

    _Pressio non propagatur per Fluidum secundum lineas rectas, nisi ubi
    particulæ Fluidi in directum jacent._

[Illustration]

Si jaceant particulæ a, b, c, d, e in linea recta, potest quidem pressio
directe propagari ab a ad e; at particula e urgebit particulas oblique
positas f & g oblique, & particulæ illæ f & g non sustinebunt pressionem
illatam, nisi fulciantur a particulis ulterioribus h & k; quatenus autem
fulciuntur, premunt particulas fulcientes; & hæ non sustinebunt pressionem
nisi fulciantur ab ulterioribus l & m easque premant, & sic deinceps in
infinitum. Pressio igitur, quam primum propagatur ad particulas quæ non in
directum jacent, divaricare incipiet & oblique propagabitur in infinitum; &
postquam incipit oblique propagari, si inciderit in particulas ulteriores,
quæ non in directum jacent, iterum divaricabit; idque toties, quoties in
particulas non accurate in directum jacentes inciderit.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol._ Si pressionis a dato puncto per Fluidum propagatæ pars aliqua
obstaculo intercipiatur, pars reliqua quæ non intercipitur divaricabit in
spatia pone obstaculum. Id quod sic etiam demonstrari potest. A puncto A
propagetur pressio quaquaversum, idque si fieri potest secundum lineas
rectas, & obstaculo NBCK perforato in BC, intercipiatur ea omnis, præter
partem Coniformem APQ, quæ per foramen circulare BC transit. Planis
transversis de, fg, hi distinguatur conus APQ in frusta & interea dum conus
ABC, pressionem propagando, urget frustum conicum ulterius degf in
superficie de, & hoc frustum urget frustum proximum fgih in superficie fg,
& frustum illud urget frustum tertium, & sic deinceps in infinitum;
manifestum est (per motus Legem tertiam) quod frustum primum defg,
reactione frusti secundi fghi, tantum urgebitur & premetur in superficie
fg, quantum urget & premit frustum illud secundum. Frustum igitur degf
inter Conum Ade & frustum fhig comprimitur utrinque, & propterea (per
Corol. 6. Prop. XIX.) figuram suam servare nequit, nisi vi eadem
comprimatur undique. Eodem igitur impetu quo premitur in superficiebus de,
fg conabitur cedere ad latera df, eg; ibique (cum rigidum non sit, sed
omnimodo Fluidum) excurret ac dilatabitur, nisi Fluidum ambiens adsit, quo
conatus iste cohibeatur. Proinde conatu excurrendi premet tam Fluidum
ambiens ad latera df, eg quam frustum fghi eodem impetu; & propterea
pressio non minus propagabitur a lateribus df, eg in spatia NO, KL hinc
inde, quam propagatur a superficie fg versus PQ.   _Q. E. D._

[Illustration]

Prop. XLII. Theor. XXXII.

    _Motus omnis per Fluidum propagatus divergit a recto tramite in spatia
    immota._

_Cas. 1._ Propagetur motus a puncto A per foramen BC, pergatque (si fieri
potest) in spatio conico BCQP, secundum lineas rectas divergentes a puncto
C. Et ponamus primo quod motus iste sit undarum in superficie stagnantis
aquæ. Sintque de, fg, hi, kl, &c. undarum singularum partes altissimæ,
vallibus totidem intermediis ab invicem distinctæ. Igitur quoniam aqua in
undarum jugis altior est quam in Fluidi partibus immotis LK, NO, defluet
eadem de jugorum terminis e, g, i, l, &c. d, f, h, k, &c. hinc inde versus
KL & NO: & quoniam in undarum vallibus depressior est quam in Fluidi
partibus immotis KL, NO; defluet eadem de partibus illis immotis in undarum
valles. Defluxu priore undarum juga, posteriore valles hinc inde dilatantur
& propagantur versus KL & NO. Et quoniam motus undarum ab A versus PQ fit
per continuum defluxum jugorum in valles proximos, adeoque celerior non est
quam pro celeritate descensus; & descensus aquæ hinc inde versus KL & NO
eadem velocitate peragi debet; propagabitur dilatatio undarum hinc inde
versus KL & NO, eadem velocitate qua undæ ipsæ ab A versus PQ recta
progrediuntur. Proindeque spatium totum hinc inde versus KL & NO ab undis
dilatatis rfgr, shis, tklt, vmnv, &c. occupabitur.   _Q. E. D._   Hæc ita
se habere quilibet in aqua stagnante experiri potest.

_Cas. 2._ Ponamus jam quod de, fg, hi, kl, mn designent pulsus a puncto A
per Medium Elasticum successive propagatos. Pulsus propagari concipe per
successivas condensationes & rarefactiones Medii, sic ut pulsus cujusque
pars densissima Sphæricam occupet superficiem circa centrum A descriptam, &
inter pulsus successivos æqualia intercedant intervalla. Designent autem
lineæ de, fg, hi, kl, &c. densissimas pulsuum partes per foramen BC
propagatas. Et quoniam Medium ibi densius est quam in spatiis hinc inde
versus KL & NO, dilatabit sese tam versus spatia illa KL, NO utrinque sita,
quam versus pulsuum rariora intervalla; eoq; pacto rarius semper evadens e
regione intervallorum ac densius e regione pulsuum, participabit eorundem
motum. Et quoniam pulsuum progressivus motus oritur a perpetua relaxatione
partium densiorum versus antecedentia intervalla rariora; & pulsus eadem
celeritate sese in Medii partes quiescentes KL, NO hinc inde relaxare
debent; pulsus illi eadem celeritate sese dilatabunt undique in spatia
immota KL, NO, qua propagantur directe a centro A; adeoque spatium totum
KLON occupabunt.   _Q. E. D._   Hoc experimur in sonis, qui vel domo
interposita audiuntur, vel in cubiculum per fenestram admissi sese in omnes
cubiculi partes dilatant, inque angulis omnibus audiuntur, non reflexi a
parietibus oppositis sed a fenestra directe propagati.

_Cas. 3._ Ponamus denique quod motus cujuscunque generis propagetur ab A
per foramen BC: & quoniam propagatio ista non fit nisi quatenus partes
Medii centro A propiores urgent commoventque partes ulteriores; & partes
quæ urgentur Fluidæ sunt, ideoque recedunt quaquaversum in regiones ubi
minus premuntur: recedent eædem versus Medii partes omnes quiescentes, tam
laterales KL & NO, quam anteriores PQ, eoque pacto motus omnis, quam primum
per foramen BC transiit, dilatari incipiet, & abinde tanquam a principio &
centro in partes omnes directe propagari.   _Q. E. D._

Prop. XLIII. Theor. XXXIII.

    _Corpus omne tremulum in Medio Elastico propagabit motum pulsuum
    undique in directum; in Medio vero non Elastico motum circularem
    excitabit._

_Cas. 1._ Nam partes corporis tremuli vicibus alternis eundo & redeundo,
itu suo urgebunt & propellent partes Medii sibi proximas, & urgendo
compriment easdem & condensabunt; dein reditu suo sinent partes compressas
recedere & sese expandere. Igitur partes Medii corpori tremulo proximæ
ibunt & redibunt per vices, ad instar partium corporis illius tremuli: &
qua ratione partes corporis hujus agitabant hasce Medii partes, hæ
similibus tremoribus agitatæ agitabunt partes sibi proximas, eæque
similiter agitatæ agitabunt ulteriores, & sic deinceps in infinitum. Et
quemadmodum Medii partes primæ eundo condensantur & redeundo relaxantur,
sic partes reliquæ quoties eunt condensabuntur, & quoties redeunt sese
expandent. Et propterea non omnes ibunt & simul redibunt (sic enim
determinatas ab invicem distantias servando non rarefierent &
condensarentur per vices) sed accedendo ad invicem ubi condensantur, &
recedendo ubi rarefiunt, aliquæ earum ibunt dum aliæ redeunt; idque vicibus
alternis in infinitum. Partes autem euntes & eundo condensatæ, ob motum
suum progressivum quo feriunt obstacula, sunt pulsus; & propterea pulsus
successivi a corpore omni tremulo in directum propagabuntur; idque
æqualibus circiter ab invicem distantiis, ob æqualia temporis intervalla,
quibus corpus tremoribus suis singulis singulos pulsus excitat.
_Q. E. D._   Et quanquam corporis tremuli partes eant & redeant secundum
plagam aliquam certam & determinatam, tamen pulsus inde per Medium
propagati sese dilatabunt ad latera, per Propositionem præcedentem; & a
corpore illo tremulo tanquam centrocommuni, secundum superficies propemodum
Sphæricas & concentricas, undique propagabuntur. Cujus rei exemplum aliquod
habemus in Undis, quæ si digito tremulo excitentur, non solum pergent hinc
inde secundum plagam motus digiti, sed, in modum circulorum concentricorum,
digitum statim cingent & undique propagabuntur. Nam gravitas undarum
supplet locum vis Elasticæ.

Quod si Medium non sit Elasticum: quoniam ejus partes a corporis tremuli
partibus vibratis pressæ condensari nequeunt, propagabitur motus in
instanti ad partes ubi Medium facillime cedit, hoc est ad partes quæ corpus
tremulum alioqui vacuas a tergo relinqueret. Idem est casus cum casu
corporis in Medio quocunque projecti. Medium cedendo projectilibus, non
recedit in infinitum, sed in circulum eundo pergit ad spatia quæ corpus
relinquit a tergo. Igitur quoties corpus tremulum pergit in partem
quamcunque, Medium cedendo perget per circulum ad partes quas corpus
relinquit, & quoties corpus regreditur ad locum priorem, Medium inde
repelletur & ad locum suum priorem redibit. Et quamvis corpus tremulum non
sit firmum, sed modis omnibus flexile, si tamen magnitudine datum maneat,
quoniam tremoribus suis nequit Medium ubivis urgere, quin alibi eidem simul
cedat; efficiet ut Medium, recedendo a partibus ubi premitur, pergat semper
in Orbem ad partes quæ eidem cedunt.

_Corol._ Hallucinantur igitur qui credunt agitationem partium flammæ ad
pressionem per Medium ambiens secundum lineas rectas propagandam conducere.
Debebit ejusmodi pressio non ab agitatione sola partium flammæ sed a totius
dilatatione derivari.

Prop. XLIV. Theor. XXXIV.

    _Si Aqua in canalis cruribus erectis KL, MN vicibus alternis ascendat &
    descendat; construatur autem Pendulum cujus longitudo inter punctum
    suspensionis & centrum oscillationis æquetur semissi longitudinis aquæ
    in Canali: dico quod aqua ascendet & descendet iisdem temporibus quibus
    pendulum oscillatur._

[Illustration]

Longitudinem aquæ mensuro secundum axes canalis & crurum, eandem summæ
horum axium æquando. Designent igitur AB, CD mediocrem altitudinem aquæ in
crure utroque; & ubi aqua in crure KL ascendit ad altitudinem EF,
descenderit aqua in crure MN ad altitudinem GH. Sit autem P corpus
pendulum, VP filum, V punctum suspensionis, SPQR Cyclois quam Pendulum
describat, P ejus punctum infimum, PQ arcus altitudini AE æqualis. Vis, qua
motus aquæ alternis vicibus acceleratur & retardatur, est excessus ponderis
aquæ in alterutro crure supra pondus in altero, ideoque ubi aqua in crure
KL ascendit ad EF, & in crure altero descendit ad GH, vis illa est pondus
duplicatum aquæ EABF, & propterea est ad pondus aquæ totius ut AE seu PQ ad
VP seu PR. Vis etiam, qua pondus P in loco quovis Q acceleratur &
retardatur in Cycloide, est ad ejus pondus totum, ut ejus distantia PQ a
loco infimo P, ad Cycloidis longitudinem PR. Quare aquæ & penduli, æqualia
spatia AE, PQ describentium, vires motrices sunt ut pondera movenda;
ideoque vires illæ, si aqua & pendulum in principio, æquali cum velocitate
moveantur; pergent eadem temporibus æqualiter movere, efficientque ut motu
reciproco simul eant & redeant.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Igitur aquæ ascendentis & descendentis, sive motus intensior
sit sive remissior, vices omnes sunt Isochronæ.

_Corol. 2._ Si longitudo aquæ totius in canali sit pedum _Parisiensium_
6-1/9, aqua tempore minuti unius secundi descendet, & tempore minuti
alterius secundi ascendet; & sic deinceps vicibus alternis in infinitum.
Nam pendulum pedum 3-1/18 longitudinis, tempore minuti unius secundi
oscillatur.

_Corol. 3._ Aucta autem vel diminuta longitudine aquæ, augetur vel
diminuitur tempus reciprocationis in longitudinis ratione dimidiata.

Prop. XLV. Theor. XXXV.

    _Undarum velocitas est in dimidiata ratione latitudinum._

Consequitur ex constructione Propositionis sequentis.

Prop. XLVI. Prob. XI.

    _Invenire velocitatem Undarum._

Constituatur Pendulum cujus longitudo inter punctum suspensionis & centrum
oscillationis æquetur latitudini Undarum: & quo tempore pendulum illud
oscillationes singulas peragit, eodem Undæ progrediendo latitudinem suam
propemodum conficient.

Undarum latitudinem voco mensuram transversam quæ vel vallibus imis vel
summis culminibus interjacet. Designet ABCDEF superficiem aquæ stagnantis,
undis successivis ascendentem ac descendentem, sintque A, C, E, &c. undarum
culmina, & B, D, F, &c. valles intermedii. Et quoniam motus undarum fit per
aquæ successivum ascensum & descensum, sic ut ejus partes A, C, E, &c. quæ
nunc infimæ sunt, mox fiant altissimæ; & vis motrix, qua partes altissimæ
descendunt & infimæ ascendunt, est pondus aquæ elevatæ; alternus ille
ascensus & descensus analogus erit motui reciproco aquæ in canali,
easdemque temporis leges observabit: & propterea (per Prop. XLIV.) si
distantiæ inter undarum loca altissima A, C, E, & infima B, D, F æquentur
duplæ penduli longitudini, partes altissimæ A, C, E tempore oscillationis
unius evadent infimæ, & tempore oscillationis alterius denuo ascendent.
Igitur inter transitum Undarum singularum tempus erit oscillationum duarum;
hoc est Unda describet latitudinem suam, quo tempore pendulum illud bis
oscillatur; sed eodem tempore pendulum, cujus longitudo quadrupla est,
adeoque æquat undarum latitudinem, oscillabitur semel.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Igitur Undæ, quæ pedes _Parisienses_ 3-1/18 latæ sunt, tempore
minuti unius secundi progrediendo latitudinem suam conficient; adeoque
tempore minuti unius primi percurrent pedes 183-1/3, & horæ spatio pedes
11000 quamproxime.

_Corol. 2._ Et undarum majorum vel minorum velocitas augebitur vel
diminuetur in dimidiata ratione latitudinis.

Hæc ita se habent ex Hypothesi quod partes aquæ recta ascendunt vel recta
descendunt; sed ascensus & descensus ille verius fit per circulum, ideoque
tempus hac Propositione non nisi quamproxime definitum esse affirmo.

Prop. XLVII. Theor. XXXVI.

    _Pulsuum in Fluido Elastico propagatorum velocitates sunt in ratione
    composita ex dimidiata ratione vis Elasticæ directe & dimidiata ratione
    densitatis inverse; si modo Fluidi vis Elastica ejusdem condensationi
    proportionalis esse supponatur._

_Cas. 1._ Si Media sint homogenea, & pulsuum distantiæ in his Mediis
æquentur inter se, sed motus in uno Medio intensior sit: contractiones &
dilatationes partium analogarum erunt ut iidem motus. Accurata quidem non
est hæc proportio. Verum tamen nisi contractiones & dilatationes sint valde
intensæ, non errabit sensibiliter, ideoque pro Physice accurata haberi
potest. Sunt autem vires Elasticæ motrices ut contractiones & dilatationes;
& velocitates partium æqualium simul genitæ sunt ut vires. Ideoque æquales
& correspondentes pulsuum correspondentium partes, itus & reditus suos per
spatia contractionibus & dilatationibus proportionalia, cum velocitatibus
quæ sunt ut spatia, simul peragent: & propterea pulsus, qui tempore itus &
reditus unius latitudinem suam progrediendo conficiunt, & in loca pulsuum
proxime præcedentium semper succedunt, ob æqualitatem distantiarum, æquali
cum velocitate in Medio utroque progredientur.

_Cas. 2._ Sin pulsuum distantiæ seu longitudines sint majores in uno Medio
quam in altero; ponamus quod partes correspondentes spatia latitudinibus
pulsuum proportionalia singulis vicibus eundo & redeundo describant: &
æquales erunt earum contractiones & dilatationes. Ideoque si Media sint
homogenea, æquales erunt etiam vires illæ Elasticæ motrices quibus
reciproco motu agitantur. Materia autem his viribus movenda, est ut pulsuum
latitudo; & in eadem ratione est spatium per quod singulis vicibus eundo &
redeundo moveri debent. Estque tempus itus & reditus unius in ratione
composita ex ratione dimidiata materiæ & ratione dimidiata spatii, atque
adeo ut spatium. Pulsus autem temporibus itus & reditus unius eundo
latitudines suas conficiunt, hoc est, spatia temporibus proportionalia
percurrunt; & propterea sunt æquiveloces.

_Cas. 3._ In Mediis igitur densitate & vi elastica paribus, pulsus omnes
sunt æquiveloces. Quod si Medii vel densitas vel vis Elastica intendatur,
quoniam vis motrix in ratione vis Elasticæ, & materia movenda in ratione
densitatis augetur; tempus quo motus iidem peragantur ac prius, augebitur
in dimidiata ratione densitatis, ac diminuetur in dimidiata ratione vis
Elasticæ. Et propterea velocitas pulsuum erit in ratione composita ex
ratione dimidiata densitatis Medii inverse & ratione dimidiata vis Elasticæ
directe.   _Q. E. D._

Prop. XLVIII. Theor. XXXVII.

    _Pulsibus per Fluidum propagatis, singulæ Fluidi particulæ, motu
    reciproco brevissimo euntes & redeuntes, accelerantur semper &
    retardantur pro lege oscillantis Penduli._

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Designent AB, BC, CD, &c. pulsuum successivorum æquales distantias; ABC
plagam motus pulsuum ab A versus B propagati; E, F, G puncta tria Physica
Medii quiescentis, in recta AC ad æquales ab invicem distantias sita; Ee,
Ff, Gg, spatia æqualia perbrevia per quæ puncta illa motu reciproco
singulis vibrationibus eunt & redeunt; [epsilon], [phi], [gamma] loca
quævis intermedia eorundem punctorum; & EF, FG lineolas Physicas seu Medii
partes lineares punctis illis interjectas, & successive translatas in loca
[epsilon][phi], [phi][gamma] & ef, fg. Rectæ Ee æqualis ducatur recta PS.
Bisecetur eadem in O, centroque O & intervallo OP describatur circulus
SIPi. Per hujus circumferentiam totam cum partibus suis exponatur tempus
totum vibrationis unius cum ipsius partibus proportionalibus; sic ut
completo tempore quovis PH vel PHSh, si demittatur ad PS perpendiculum HL
vel hl, & capiatur Ee æqualis PL vel Pl, punctum Physicum E reperiatur in
[epsilon]. Hac lege punctum quodvis E eundo ab E per [epsilon] ad e, & inde
redeundo per [epsilon] ad E iisdem accelerationis ac retardationis
gradibus, vibrationes singulas peraget cum oscillante Pendulo. Probandum
est quod singula Medii puncta Physica tali motu agitari debeant. Fingamus
igitur Medium tali motu a causa quacunque cieri, & videamus quid inde
sequatur.

In circumferentia PHSh capiantur æquales arcus HI, IK vel hi, ik, eam
habentes rationem ad circumferentiam totam quam habent æquales rectæ EF, FG
ad pulsuum intervallum totum BC. Et demissis perpendiculis IM, KN vel im,
kn; quoniam puncta E, F, G motibus similibus successive agitantur, si PH
vel PHSk sit tempus ab initio motus puncti E, erit PI vel PHSi tempus ab
initio motus puncti F, & PK vel PHSh tempus ab initio motus puncti G; &
propterea E[epsilon], F[phi], G[gamma] erunt ipsis PL, PM, PN in itu
punctorum, vel ipsis Pn, Pm, Pl in punctorum reditu, æquales respective.
Unde [epsilon][gamma] in itu punctorum æqualis erit EG - LN, in reditu
autem æqualis EG + ln. Sed [epsilon][gamma] latitudo est seu expansio
partis Medii EG in loco [epsilon][gamma], & propterea expansio partis
illius in itu, est ad ejus expansionem mediocrem ut EG - LN ad EG; in
reditu autem ut EG + ln seu EG + LN ad EG. Quare cum sit LN ad KH ut IM ad
radium OP, & EG ad BC ut HK ad circumferentiam PHShP, & vicissim EG ad HK
ut BC ad circumferentiam PHShP, id est (si circumferentia dicatur Z) ut OP
× BC ÷ Z ad OP, & ex æquo LN ad EG ut IM ad OP × BC ÷ Z: erit expansio
partis EG in loco [epsilon][gamma] ad expansionem mediocrem quam habet in
loco suo primo EG, ut {OP × BC ÷ Z} - IM ad OP × BC ÷ Z in itu, utque {OP ×
BC ÷ Z} + im ad OP × BC ÷ Z in reditu. Unde si OP × BC ÷ Z dicatur V, erit
expansio partis EG, punctive Physici F, ad ejus expansionem mediocrem in
itu, ut V - IM ad V, in reditu ut V + im ad V; & ejusdem vis elastica ad
vim suam elasticam mediocrem in itu, ut 1 ÷ {V - IM} ad 1 ÷ V; in reditu,
ut 1 ÷ {V + im} ad 1 ÷ V. Et eodem argumento vires Elasticæ punctorum
Physicorum E & G in itu, sunt ut 1 ÷ {V - HL} & 1 ÷ {V - KN} ad 1 ÷ V; &
virium differentia ad Medii vim elasticam mediocrem, ut

            HL - KN                  1
  ------------------------------ ad ---.
  VV - V × HL - V × KN + HL × KN     V

Hoc est (si ob brevitatem pulsuum supponamus HK & KN indefinite minores
esse quantitate V) ut {HL - KN} ÷ VV ad 1 ÷ V, sive ut HL - KN ad V. Quare
cum quantitas V detur, differentia virium est ut HL - KN, hoc est (ob
proportionales HL - KN ad HK, & OM ad OI vel OP, datasque HK & OP) ut OM;
id est, si Ff bisecetur in [Omega], ut [Omega][phi]. Et eodem argumento
differentia virium Elasticarum punctorum Physicorum [epsilon] & [gamma], in
reditu lineolæ Physicæ [epsilon][gamma] est ut [Omega][phi]. Sed
differentia illa (id est excessus vis Elasticæ puncti [epsilon] supra vim
elasticam puncti [gamma],) est vis qua interjecta Medii lineola Physica
[epsilon][gamma] acceleratur; & propterea vis acceleratrix lineolæ Physicæ
[epsilon][gamma] est ut ipsius distantia a Medio vibrationis loco [Omega].
Proinde tempus (per Prop. XXXVIII. Lib. I.) recte exponitur per arcum PI; &
Medii pars linearis [epsilon][gamma] lege præscripta movetur, id est lege
oscillantis Penduli: estque par ratio partium omnium linearium ex quibus
Medium totum componitur.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol._ Hinc patet quod numerus pulsuum propagatorum idem sit cum numero
vibrationum corporis tremuli, neque multiplicatur in eorum progressu. Nam
lineola Physica [epsilon][gamma], quamprimum ad locum suum primum redierit,
quiescet; neque deinceps movebitur, nisi vel ab impetu corporis tremuli,
vel ab impetu pulsuum qui a corpore tremulo propagantur, motu novo cieatur.
Quiescet igitur quamprimum pulsus a corpore tremulo propagari desinunt.

Prop. XLIX. Prob. XII.

    _Datis Medii densitate & vi Elastica, invenire velocitatem pulsuum._

Fingamus Medium ab incumbente pondere, pro more Aeris nostri comprimi,
sitque A altitudo Medii homogenei, cujus pondus adæquet pondus incumbens, &
cujus densitas eadem sit cum densitate Medii compressi, in quo pulsus
propagantur. Constitui autem intelligatur Pendulum, cujus longitudo inter
punctum suspensionis & centrum oscillationis sit A: & quo tempore pendulum
illud oscillationem integram ex itu & reditu compositam peragit, eodem
pulsus eundo conficiet spatium circumferentiæ circuli radio A descripti
æquale.

Nam stantibus quæ in Propositione superiore constructa sunt, si linea
quævis Physica, EF singulis vibrationibus describendo spatium PS, urgeatur
in extremis itus & reditus cujusque locis P & S, a vi Elastica quæ ipsius
ponderi æquetur; peraget hæc vibrationes singulas quo tempore eadem in
Cycloide, cujus Perimeter tota longitudini PS æqualis est, oscillari
posset: id adeo quia vires æquales æqualia corpuscula per æqualia spatia
simul impellent. Quare cum oscillationum tempora sint in dimidiata ratione
longitudinis pendulorum, & longitudo penduli æquetur dimidio arcui
Cycloidis totius; foret tempus vibrationis unius ad tempus oscillationis
Penduli cujus longitudo est A, in dimidiata ratione longitudinis ½PS seu PO
ad longitudinem A. Sed vis Elastica qua lineola Physica EG, in locis suis
extremis P, S existens, urgetur, erat (in demonstratione Propositionis
superioris) ad ejus vim totam Elasticam ut HL - KN ad V, hoc est (cum
punctum K jam incidat in P) ut HK ad V: & vis illa tota, hoc est pondus
incumbens, qua lineola EG comprimitur, est ad pondus lineolæ ut ponderis
incumbentis altitudo A ad lineolæ longitudinem EG; adeoque ex æquo, vis qua
lineola EG in locis suis P & S urgetur, est ad lineolæ illius pondus ut HK
× A ad V × EG. Quare cum tempora, quibus æqualia corpora per æqualia spatia
impelluntur, sint reciproce in dimidiata ratione virium, erit tempus
vibrationis unius urgente vi illa Elastica, ad tempus vibrationis urgente
vi ponderis, in dimidiata ratione V × EG ad HK × A, atque adeo ad tempus
oscillationis Penduli cujus longitudo est A, in dimidiata ratione V × EG ad
HK × A & PO ad A conjunctim; id est (cùm fuerit, in superiore Propositione,
V æqualis PO × BC ÷ Z, & HK æqualis EG × Z ÷ BC) in dimidiata ratione PO
qu. × BC × EG ÷ Z ad EG × Z × A qu. ÷ BC seu PO qu. × BC qu. ad Z qu. × A
qu. hoc est in ratione PO × BC ad Z × A, seu BC ad Z × A ÷ PO. Sed tempore
vibrationis unius ex itu & reditu compositæ, pulsus progrediendo conficit
latitudinem suam BC. Ergo tempus quo pulsus percurrit spatium BC, est ad
tempus oscillationis unius ex itu & reditu compositæ, ut BC ad Z × A ÷ PO,
id est ut BC ad circumferentiam circuli cujus radius est A. Tempus autem,
quo pulsus percurret spatium BC, est ad tempus quo percurret longitudinem
huic circumferentiæ æqualem, in eadem ratione; ideoque tempore talis
oscillationis pulsus percurret longitudinem huic circumferentiæ æqualem.
_Q. E. D._

Prop. L. Prob. XIII.

    _Invenire pulsuum distantias._

Corporis, cujus tremore pulsus excitantur, inveniatur numerus Vibrationum
dato tempore. Per numerum illum dividatur spatium quod pulsus eodem tempore
percurrere possit, & pars inventa erit pulsus unius latitudo.   _Q. E. I._

_Schol._

Spectant Propositiones novissimæ ad motum Lucis & Sonorum. Lux enim cum
propagetur secundum lineas rectas, in actione sola (per Prop. XLI. & XLII.)
consistere nequit. Soni vero propterea quod a corporibus tremulis oriantur,
nihil aliud sunt quàm aeris pulsus propagati, per Prop. XLIII. Confirmatur
id ex tremoribus quos excitant in corporibus objectis, si modò vehementes
sint & graves, quales sunt soni Tympanorum. Nam tremores celeriores &
breviores difficilius excitantur. Sed & sonos quosvis, in chordas
corporibus sonoris unisonas impactos, excitare tremores notissimum est.
Confirmatur etiam ex velocitate sonorum. Nam cùm pondera specifica Aquæ
pluvialis & Argenti vivi sint ad invicem ut 1 ad 13-2/3 circiter, & ubi
_Mercurius_ in _Barometro_ altitudinem attingit digitorum _Anglicorum_ 30,
pondus specificum Aeris & aquæ pluvialis sint ad invicem ut 1 ad 850
circiter: erunt pondera specifica aeris & argenti vivi ut 1 ad 11617.
Proinde cum altitudo argenti vivi sit 30 digitorum, altitudo aeris
uniformis, cujus pondus aerem nostrum subjectum comprimere posset, erit
348500 digitorum seu pedum _Anglicorum_ 29042. Estque hæc altitudo illa
ipsa quam in constructione superioris Problematis nominavimus A. Circuli
radio 29042 pedum descripti circumferentia est pedum 182476. Et cum
Pendulum digitos 39-1/5 longum, oscillationem ex itu & reditu compositam,
tempore minutorum duorum secundorum, uti notum est, absolvat; pendulum
pedes 29042, seu digitos 348500, longum, oscillationem consimilem tempore
minutorum secundorum 188-4/7 absolvere debebit. Eo igitur tempore sonus
progrediendo conficiet pedes 182476, adeoque tempore minuti unius secundi
pedes 968. Scribit _Mersennus_, in Balisticæ suæ Prop. XXXV. se factis
experimentis invenisse quod sonus minutis quinque secundis hexapedas
_Gallicas_ 1150 (id est pedes _Gallicos_ 6900) percurrat. Unde cum pes
_Gallicus_ sit ad _Anglicum_ ut 1068 ad 1000, debebit sonus tempore minuti
unius secundi pedes _Anglicos_ 1474 conficere. Scribit etiam idem
_Mersennus Robervallum_ Geometram clarissimum in Obsidione _Theodonis_
observasse tormentorum fragorem exauditum esse post 13 vel 14 ab igne viso
minuta secunda, cùm tamen vix dimidiam _Leucam_ ab illis Tormentis
abfuerit. Continet _Leuca Gallica_ hexapedas 2500, adeoque sonus tempore 13
vel 14 secundorum, ex Observatione _Robervalli_, confecit pedes
_Parisienses_ 7500, ac tempore minuti unius secundi pedes _Parisienses_
560, _Anglicos_ verò 600 circiter. Multum differunt hæ Observationes ab
invicem, & computus noster medium locum tenet. In porticu Collegii nostri
pedes 208 longa, sonus in termino alterutro excitatus quaterno recursu Echo
quadruplicem efficit. Factis autem experimentis inveni quod singulis soni
recursibus pendulum quasi sex vel septem digitorum longitudinis
oscillabatur, ad priorem soni recursum eundo & ad posteriorem redeundo.
Longitudinem penduli satis accuratè definire nequibam: sed longitudine
quatuor digitorum, oscillationes nimis celeres esse, ea novem digitorum
nimis tardas judicabam. Unde sonus eundo & redeundo confecit pedes 416
minore tempore quàm pendulum digitorum novem, & majore quàm pendulum
digitorum quatuor oscillatur; id est minore tempore quàm 28¾ minutorum
tertiorum, & majore quàm 19-1/6; & propterea tempore minuti unius secundi
conficit pedes _Anglicos_ plures quàm 866 & pauciores quàm 1272, atque adeò
velocior est quàm pro Observatione _Robervalli,_ ac tardior quàm pro
Observatione _Mersenni_. Quinetiam accuratioribus postea Observationibus
definivi quod longitudo penduli major esse deberet quàm digitorum quinque
cum semisse, & minor quàm digitorum octo; adeoque quòd sonus tempore minuti
unius secundi confecit pedes _Anglicos_ plures quàm 920 & pauciores quàm
1085. Igitur motus sonorum, secundum calculum Geometricum superius allatum,
inter hos limites consistens, quadrat cum Phænomenis, quatenus hactenus
tentare licuit. Proinde cùm motus iste pendeat ab aeris totius densitate,
consequens est quod soni non in motu ætheris vel aeris cujusdam
subtilioris, sed in aeris totius agitatione consistat.

Refragari videntur experimenta quædam de sono in vasis aere vacuis
propagato, sed vasa aere omni evacuari vix possunt; & ubi satis evacuantur
soni notabiliter imminui solent; _Ex. gr._ Si aeris totius pars tantùm
centesima in vase maneat, debebit sonus esse centuplo languidior, atque
adeò non minus audiri quàm si quis sonum eundem in aere libero excitatum
audiendo, subinde ad decuplam distantiam à corpore sonoro recederet.
Conferenda sunt igitur corpora duo æqualiter sonora, quorum alterum in vase
evacuato, alterum in aere libero consistat, & quorum distantiæ ab auditore
sint in dimidiata ratione densitatum aeris: & si sonus corporis prioris non
superat sonum posterioris objectio cessabit.

Cognita sonorum velocitate, innotescunt etiam intervalla pulsuum. Scribit
_Mersennus_ (Lib. I. Harmonicorum Prop. IV.) se (factis experimentis
quibusdam quæ ibidem describit) invenisse quod nervus tensus vicibus 104
recurrit spatio minuti unius secundi, quando facit Unisonum cum organica
Fistula quadrupedali aperta vel bipedali obturata, quam vocant Organarii _C
fa ut_. Sunt igitur pulsus 104 in spatio pedum 968, quos sonus tempore
minuti secundi describit: adeoque pulsus unus occupat spatium pedum 9¼
circiter; id est duplam circiter longitudinem fistulæ. Unde verisimile est
quòd latitudines pulsuum, in omnium apertarum fistularum sonis, æquentur
duplis longitudinibus fistularum.

Porrò cur Soni cessante motu corporis sonori statim cessant, neque diutiùs
audiuntur ubi longissimè distamus à corporibus sonoris, quàm cum proximè
absumus, patet ex Corollario Propositionis XLVIII. Libri hujus. Sed & cur
soni in Tubis Stenterophonicis valde augentur, ex allatis principiis
manifestum est. Motus enim omnis reciprocus singulis recursibus à causa
generante augeri solet. Motus autem in Tubis dilatationem sonorum
impedientibus tardiùs amittitur & fortius recurrit, & propterea à motu novo
singulis recursibus impresso magis augetur. Et hæc sunt præcipua Phænomena
Sonorum.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECT. IX.

_De motu Circulari Fluidorum._

Hypothesis.

    _Resistentiam, quæ oritur ex defectu lubricitatis partium Fluidi,
    cæteris paribus, proportionalem esse velocitati, qua partes Fluidi
    separantur ab invicem._

Prop. LI. Theor. XXXVIII.

    _Si Cylindrus solidus infinitè longus in fluido uniformi & infinito
    circa axem positione datum uniformi cum motu revolvatur, & ab hujus
    impulsu solo agatur Fluidum in Orbem, perseveret autem fluidi pars
    unaquæque uniformiter in motu suo; dico quod tempora periodica partium
    fluidi sunt ut ipsarum distantiæ ab axe cylindri._

[Illustration]

Sit AFL cylindrus uniformiter circa axem S in orbem actus, & circulis
concentricis BGM, CHN, DIO, EKP, &c. distinguatur fluidum in orbes
cylindricos innumeros concentricos solidos ejusdem crassitudinis. Et
quoniam homogeneum est Fluidum, impressiones contiguorum orbium in se mutuò
factæ, erunt (per Hypothesin) ut eorum translationes ab invicem &
superficies contiguæ in quibus impressiones fiunt. Si impressio in Orbem
aliquem major est vel minor, ex parte concava quàm ex parte convexa,
prævalebit impressio fortior, & motum Orbis vel accelerabit vel retardabit
prout in eandem regionem cum ipsius motu, vel in contrariam dirigitur.
Proinde ut Orbis unusquisque in motu suo uniformiter perseveret, debent
impressiones ex parte utraque sibi invicem æquari, & fieri in regiones
contrarias. Unde cùm impressiones sunt ut contiguæ superficies & harum
translationes ab invicem, erunt translationes inversè ut superficies, hoc
est inversè ut superficierum distantiæ ab axe. Sunt autem differentiæ
motuum angularium circa axem ut hæ translationes applicatæ ad distantias,
sive ut translationes directè & distantiæ inversè; hoc est (conjunctis
rationibus) ut quadrata distantiarum inversè. Quare si ad infinitæ rectæ
SABCDEQ partes singulas erigantur perpendicula Aa, Bb, Cc, Dd, Ee, &c.
ipsarum SA, SB, SC, SD, SE, &c. quadratis reciprocè proportionalia, & per
terminos perpendicularium duci intelligatur linea curva Hyperbolica; erunt
summæ distantiarum, hoc est motus toti angulares, ut respondentes summæ
linearum Aa, Bb, Cc, Dd, Ee: id est, si ad constituendum Medium uniformiter
fluidum orbium numerus augeatur & latitudo minuatur in infinitum, ut areæ
Hyperbolicæ his summis Analogæ AaQ, BbQ, CcQ, DdQ, EeQ, &c. & tempora
motibus angularibus reciprocè proportionalia erunt etiam his areis
reciprocè proportionalia. Est igitur tempus periodicum particulæ cujusvis D
reciprocè ut area DdQ, hoc est, (per notas Curvarum quadraturas) directè ut
distantia SD.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Hinc motus angulares particularum fluidi sunt reciprocè ut
ipsarum distantiæ ab axe Cylindri, & velocitates absolutæ sunt æquales.

_Corol. 2._ Si fluidum in vase cylindrico longitudinis infinitæ
contineantur, & cylindrum alium interiorem contineat, revolvatur autem
cylindrus uterque circa axem communem, sintque revolutionum tempora ut
ipsorum semidiametri, & perseveret fluidi pars unaquæque in motu suo: erunt
partium singularum tempora periodica ut ipsarum distantiæ ab axe
cylindrorum.

_Corol. 3._ Si cylindro & fluido ad hunc modum motis addatur vel auferatur
communis quilibet motus angularis; quoniam hoc novo motu non mutatur
attritus mutuus partium fluidi, non mutabuntur motus partium inter se. Nam
translationes partium ab invicem pendent ab attritu. Pars quælibet in eo
perseverabit motu, qui attritu utrinque in contrarias partes facto, non
magis acceleratur quàm retardatur.

_Corol. 4._ Unde si toti cylindrorum & fluidi Systemati auferatur motus
omnis angularis cylindri exterioris, habebitur motus fluidi in cylindro
quiescente.

_Corol. 5._ Igitur si fluido & cylindro exteriore quiescentibus, revolvatur
cylindrus interior uniformiter, communicabitur motus circularis fluido, &
paulatim per totum fluidum propagabitur; nec prius desinet augeri quàm
fluidi partes singulæ motum Corollario quarto definitum acquirant.

_Corol. 6._ Et quoniam fluidum conatur motum suum adhuc latius propagare,
hujus impetu circumagetur etiam cylindrus exterior nisi violenter detentus;
& accelerabitur ejus motus quoad usque tempora periodica cylindri utriusque
æquentur inter se. Quod si cylindrus exterior violenter detineatur,
conabitur is motum fluidi retardare, & nisi cylindrus interior vi aliqua
extrinsecùs impressa motum illum conservet, efficiet ut idem paulatim
cesset.

Quæ omnia in aqua profunda stagnante experiri licet.

Prop. LII. Theor. XXXIX.

    _Si Sphæra solida, in fluido uniformi & infinito, circa axem positione
    datum uniformi cum motu revolvatur, & ab hujus impulsu solo agatur
    fluidum in orbem; perseveret autem fluidi pars unaquæque uniformiter in
    motu suo: dico quod tempora periodica partium fluidi erunt ut quadrata
    distantiarum à centro Sphæræ._ Fig. Prop. LI.

_Cas. 1._ Sit AFL sphæra uniformiter circa axem S in orbem acta, & circulis
concentricis BGM, CHN, DIO, EKP, &c. distinguatur fluidum in orbes
innumeros concentricos ejusdem crassitudinis. Finge autem orbes illos esse
solidos; & quoniam homogeneum est fluidum, impressiones contiguorum Orbium
in se mutuò factæ, erunt (per Hypothesin) ut eorum translationes ab invicem
& superficies contiguæ in quibus impressiones fiunt. Si impressio in orbem
aliquem major est vel minor ex parte concava quàm ex parte convexa,
prævalebit impressio fortior, & velocitatem Orbis vel accelerabit vel
retardabit, prout in eandem regionem cum ipsius motu vel in contrariam
dirigitur. Proinde ut orbis unusquisque in motu suo perseveret uniformiter,
debebunt impressiones ex parte utraque sibi invicem æquari, & fieri in
regiones contrarias. Unde cum impressiones sint ut contiguæ superficies &
harum translationes ab invicem; erunt translationes inversè ut superficies,
hoc est inversè ut quadrata distantiarum superficierum à centro. Sunt autem
differentiæ motuum angularium circa axem ut hæ translationes applicatæ ad
distantias, sive ut translationes directè & distantiæ inversè; hoc est
(conjunctis rationibus) ut cubi distantiarum inversè. Quare si ad rectæ
infinitæ SABCDEQ partes singulas erigantur perpendicula Aa, Bb, Cc, Dd, Ee,
&c. ipsarum SA, SB, SC, SD, SE, &c. cubis reciprocè proportionalia, erunt
summæ distantiarum, hoc est, motus toti angulares, ut respondentes summæ
linearum Aa, Bb, Cc, Dd, Ee: id est (si ad constituendum Medium uniformiter
fluidum, numerus Orbium augeatur & latitudo minuatur in infinitum) ut areæ
Hyperbolicæ his summis analogæ AaQ, BbQ, CcQ, DdQ, EeQ, &c. Et tempora
periodica motibus angularibus reciprocè proportionalia erunt etiam his
areis reciprocè proportionalia. Est igitur tempus periodicum orbis cujusvis
DIO reciprocè ut area DdQ, hoc est, (per notas Curvarum quadraturas)
directè ut quadratum distantiæ SD. Id quod volui primò demonstrare.

_Cas. 2._ A centro Sphæræ ducantur infinitæ rectæ quam plurimæ, quæ cum axe
datos contineant angulos, æqualibus differentiis se mutuò superantes; & his
rectis circa axem revolutis concipe orbes in annulos innumeros secari; &
annulus unusquisque habebit annulos quatuor sibi contiguos, unum
interiorem, alterum exteriorem & duos laterales. Attritu interioris &
exterioris non potest annulus unusquisque, nisi in motu juxta legem casus
primi facto, æqualiter & in partes contrarias urgeri. Patet hoc ex
demonstratione casus primi. Et propterea annulorum series quælibet à globo
in infinitum rectà pergens movebitur pro lege casus primi, nisi quatenus
impeditur ab attritu annulorum ad latera. At in motu hac lege facto,
attritus annulorum ad latera nullus est, neque adeò motum, quo minus hac
lege fiat, impediet. Si annuli, qui à centro æqualiter distant, vel citiùs
revolverentur vel tardiùs juxta polos quàm juxta æquatorem; tardiores
accelerarentur, & velociores retardarentur ab attritu mutuo, & sic
vergerent semper tempora periodica ad æqualitatem, pro lege casus primi.
Non impedit igitur hic attritus quo minus motus fiat secundum legem casus
primi, & propterea lex illa obtinebit: hoc est annulorum singulorum tempora
periodica erunt ut quadrata distantiarum ipsorum à centro globi. Quod volui
secundo demonstrare.

_Cas. 3._ Dividatur jam annulus unusquisque sectionibus transversis in
particulas innumeras constituentes substantiam absolutè & uniformiter
fluidam; & quoniam hæ sectiones non spectant ad legem motus circularis, sed
ad constitutionem fluidi solummodo conducunt, perseverabit motus circularis
ut priùs. His sectionibus annuli omnes quamminimi asperitatem & vim
attritus mutui aut non mutabunt aut mutabunt æqualiter. Et manente causarum
proportione manebit effectuum proportio, hoc est proportio motuum &
periodicorum temporum.   _Q. E. D._   Cæterum cum motus circularis, &
abinde orta vis centrifuga, major sit ad Eclipticam quàm ad polos; debebit
causa aliqua adesse qua particulæ singulæ in circulis suis retineantur, ne
materia quæ ad Eclipticam est recedat semper à centro & per exteriora
Vorticis migret ad polos, indeque per axem ad Eclipticam circulatione
perpetua revertatur.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc motus angulares partium fluidi circa axem globi sunt
reciprocè ut quadrata distantiarum à centro globi, & velocitates absolutæ
reciprocè ut eadem quadrata applicata ad distantias ab axe.

_Corol. 2._ Si globus in fluido quiescente similari & infinito circa axem
positione datum uniformi cum motu revolvatur, communicabitur motus fluido
in morem Vorticis, & motus iste paulatim propagabitur in infinitum; neque
prius cessabit in singulis fluidi partibus accelerari, quàm tempora
periodica singularum partium sint ut quadrata distantiarum à centro globi.

_Corol. 3._ Quoniam Vorticis partes interiores ob majorem suam velocitatem
atterunt & urgent exteriores, motumque ipsis ea actione perpetuò
communicant, & exteriores illi eandem motus quantitatem in alios adhuc
exteriores simul transferunt, eaque actione servant quantitatem motus sui
planè invariatam; patet quod motus perpetuò transfertur à centro ad
circumferentiam Vorticis, & per infinitatem circumferentiæ absorbetur.
Materia inter sphæricas duas quasvis superficies Vortici concentricas
nunquam accelerabitur, eò quod motum omnem à materia interiore acceptum
transfert semper in exteriorem.

_Corol. 4._ Proinde ad conservationem Vorticis constanter in eodem movendi
statu, requiritur principium aliquod activum à quo globus eandem semper
quantitatem motus accipiat quam imprimit in materiam vorticis. Absque tali
principio necesse est ut globus & Vorticis partes interiores, propagantes
semper motum suum in exteriores, neque novum aliquem motum recipientes,
tardescant paulatim & in orbem agi desinant.

_Corol. 5._ Si globus alter huic Vortici ad certam ab ipsius centro
distantiam innataret, & interea circa axem inclinatione datum vi aliqua
constanter revolveretur; hujus motu raperetur fluidum in vorticem: & primò
revolveretur hic vortex novus & exiguus una cum globo circa centrum
alterius, & interea latiùs serperet ipsius motus, & paulatim propagaretur
in infinitum, ad modum vorticis primi. Et eadem ratione qua hujus globus
raperetur motu vorticis alterius, raperetur etiam globus alterius motu
hujus, sic ut globi duo circa intermedium aliquod punctum revolverentur,
seque mutuò ob motum illum circularem fugerent, nisi per vim aliquam
cohibiti. Postea si vires constanter impressæ, quibus globi in motibus suis
perseverant, cessarent, & omnia legibus Mechanicis permitterentur,
languesceret paulatim motus globorum (ob rationem in Corol. 3. & 4.
assignatam) & vortices tandem conquiescerent.

_Corol. 6._ Si globi plures datis in locis circum axes positione datos
certis cum velocitatibus constanter revolverentur, fierent vortices totidem
in infinitum pergentes. Nam globi singuli, eadem ratione qua unus aliquis
motum suum propagat in infinitum, propagabunt etiam motus suos in
infinitum, adeò ut fluidi infiniti pars unaquæque eo agitetur motu qui ex
omnium globorum actionibus resultat. Unde vortices non definientur certis
limitibus, sed in se mutuò paulatim excurrent; globiq; per actiones
vorticum in se mutuò, perpetuò movebuntur de locis suis; uti in Lemmate
superiore expositum est; neq; certam quamvis inter se positionem servabunt,
nisi per vim aliquam retenti. Cessantibus autem viribus illis quæ in globos
constanter impressæ conservant hosce motus, materia ob rationem in
Corollario tertio & quarto assignatam paulatim requiescet & in vortices agi
desinet.

_Corol. 7._ Si Fluidum similare claudatur in vase sphærico, ac globi in
centro consistentis uniformi rotatione agatur in vorticem, globus autem &
vas in eandem partem circa axem eundem revolvantur, sintq; eorum tempora
periodica ut quadrata semidiametrorum: partes fluidi non prius
perseverabunt in motibus suis sine acceleratione & retardatione, quàm sint
eorum tempora periodica ut quadrata distantiarum à centro vorticis. Alia
nulla Vorticis constitutio potest esse permanens.

_Corol. 8._ Si vas, Fluidum inclusum & globus servent hunc motum, & motu
præterea communi angulari circa axem quemvis datum revolvantur; quoniam hoc
motu novo non mutatur attritus partium fluidi in se invicem, non mutabuntur
motus partium inter se. Nam translationes partium inter se pendent ab
attritu. Pars quælibet in eo perseverabit motu, quo fit ut attritu ex uno
latere non magis tardetur quàm acceleretur attritu ex altero.

_Corol. 9._ Unde si vas quiescat ac detur motus globi, dabitur motus
fluidi. Nam concipe planum transire per axem globi & motu contrario
revolvi; & pone tempus revolutionis hujus esse ad summam hujus temporis &
temporis revolutionis globi, ut quadratum semidiametri vasis ad quadratum
semidiametri globi: & tempora periodica partium fluidi respectu plani hujus
erunt ut quadrata distantiarum suarum à centro globi.

_Corol. 10._ Proinde si vas vel circa axem eundem cum globo, vel circa
diversum aliquem, data cum velocitate quacunq; moveatur, dabitur motus
fluidi. Nam si Systemati toti auferatur vasis motus angularis, manebunt
motus omnes iidem inter se qui prius, per Corol. 8. Et motus isti per
Corol. 9. dabuntur.

_Corol. 11._ Si vas & fluidum quiescant & globus uniformi cum motu
revolvatur, propagabitur motus paulatim per fluidum totum in vas, &
circumagetur vas nisi violenter detentum, neq; prius desinent fluidum & vas
accelerari, quàm sint eorum tempora periodica æqualia temporibus periodicis
globi. Quod si vas vi aliqua detineatur vel revolvatur motu quovis
constanti & uniformi, deveniet Medium paulatim ad statum motus in
Corollariis 8. 9 & 10 definiti, nec in alio unquam statu quocunq;
perseverabit. Deinde verò si, viribus illis cessantibus quibus vas & globus
certis motibus revolvebantur, permittatur Systema totum Legibus Mechanicis;
vas & globus in se invicem agent mediante fluido, neq; motus suos in se
mutuò per fluidum propagare prius cessabunt, quàm eorum tempora periodica
æquantur inter se, & Systema totum ad instar corporis unius solidi simul
revolvatur.

_Scholium._

In his omnibus suppono fluidum ex materia quoad densitatem & fluiditatem
uniformi constare. Tale est in quo globus idem eodem cum motu, in eodem
temporis intervallo, motus similes & æquales, ad æquales semper à se
distantias, ubivis in fluido constitutus, propagare possit. Conatur quidem
materia per motum suum circularem recedere ab axe Vorticis, & propterea
premit materiam omnem ulteriorem. Ex hac pressione fit attritus partium
fortior & separatio ab invicem difficilior; & per consequens diminuitur
materiæ fluiditas. Rursus si partes fluidi sunt alicubi crassiores seu
majores, fluiditas ibi minor erit, ob pauciores superficies in quibus
partes separentur ab invicem. In hujusmodi casibus deficientem fluiditatem
vel lubricitate partium vel lentore aliave aliqua conditione restitui
suppono. Hoc nisi fiat, materia ubi minùs fluida est magis cohærebit &
segnior erit, adeoq; motum tardiùs recipiet & longiùs propagabit quàm pro
ratione superiùs assignata. Si figura vasis non sit Sphærica, movebuntur
particulæ in lineis non circularibus sed conformibus eidem vasis figuræ, &
tempora periodica erunt ut quadrata mediocrium distantiarum à centro
quamproximè. In partibus inter centrum & circumferentiam, ubi latiora sunt
spatia, tardiores erunt motus, ubi angustiora velociores; neque tamen
particulæ velociores petent circumferentiam. Arcus enim describent minus
curvos, & conatus recedendi à centro non minus diminuetur per decrementum
hujus curvaturæ, quàm augebitur per incrementum velocitatis. Pergendo à
spatiis angustioribus in latiora recedent paulò longiùs à centro, sed isto
recessu tardescent; & accedendo postea de latioribus ad angustiora
accelerabuntur, & sic per vices tardescent & accelerabuntur particulæ
singulæ in perpetuum. Hæc ita se habebunt in vase rigido. Nam in fluido
infinito constitutio Vorticum innotescit per Propositionis hujus
Corollarium sextum.

Proprietates autem Vorticum hac Propositione investigare conatus sum, ut
pertentarem siqua ratione Phænomena coelestia per Vortices explicari
possint. Nam Phænomenon est quod Planetarum circa Jovem revolventium
tempora periodica sunt in ratione sesquialtera distantiarum à centro Jovis;
& eadem Regula obtinet in Planetis qui circa Solem revolvuntur. Obtinent
autem hæ Regulæ in Planetis utrisque quam accuratissimè, quatenus
observationes Astronomicæ hactenus prodidêre. Ideoq; si Planetæ illi à
Vorticibus circa Jovem & Solem revolventibus deferantur, debebunt etiam hi
Vortices eadem lege revolvi. Verum tempora periodica partium Vorticis
prodierunt in ratione duplicata distantiarum à centro motus: neque potest
ratio illa diminui & ad rationem sesquialteram reduci, nisi vel materia
vorticis eo fluidior sit quo longius distat à centro, vel resistentia, quæ
oritur ex defectu lubricitatis partium fluidi, ex aucta velocitate qua
partes fluidi separantur ab invicem, augeatur in majori ratione quàm ea est
in qua velocitas augetur. Quorum tamen neutrum rationi consentaneum
videtur. Partes crassiores & minus fluidæ (nisi graves sint in centrum)
circumferentiam petent; & verisimile est quod, etiamsi Demonstrationum
gratia Hypothesin talem initio Sectionis hujus proposuerim ut Resistentia
velocitati proportionalis esset, tamen Resistentia in minori sit ratione
quàm ea velocitatis est. Quo concesso tempora periodica partium Vorticis
erunt in majori quàm duplicata ratione distantiarum ab ipsius centro. Quod
si vortices (uti aliquorum est opinio) celeriùs moveantur prope centrum,
dein tardiùs usque ad certum limitem, tum denuò celeriùs juxta
circumferentiam; certè nec ratio sesquialtera neque alia quævis certa ac
determinata obtinere potest. Viderint itaq; Philosophi quo pacto Phænomenon
illud rationis sesquialteræ per Vortices explicari possit.

Prop. LIII. Theor. XL.

    _Corpora quæ in Vortice delata in orbem redeunt ejusdem sunt densitatis
    cum Vortice, & eadem lege cum ipsius partibus (quoad velocitatem &
    cursus determinationem) moventur._

Nam si vorticis pars aliqua exigua, cujus particulæ seu puncta physica
datum servant situm inter se, congelari supponatur: hæc, quoniam neq; quoad
densitatem suam, neque quoad vim insitam aut figuram suam mutatur,
movebitur eadem lege ac prius: & contra, si Vorticis pars congelata &
solida ejusdem sit densitatis cum reliquo vortice, & resolvatur in fluidum;
movebitur hæc eadem lege ac prius, nisi quatenus ipsius particulæ jam
fluidæ factæ moveantur inter se. Negligatur igitur motus particularum inter
se, tanquam ad totius motum progressivum nil spectans, & motus totius idem
erit ac prius. Motus autem idem erit cum motu aliarum Vorticis partium à
centro æqualiter distantium, propterea quod solidum in Fluidum resolutum
fit pars Vorticis cæteris partibus consimilis. Ergo solidum, si sit ejusdem
densitatis cum materia Vorticis, eodem motu cum ipsius partibus movebitur,
in materia proximè ambiente relative quiescens. Sin densius sit, jam magis
conabitur recedere à centro Vorticis quàm priùs; adeoq; Vorticis vim illam,
qua priùs in Orbita sua tanquam in æquilibrio constitutum retinebatur, jam
superans, recedet à centro & revolvendo describet Spiralem, non amplius in
eundem Orbem rediens. Et eodem argumento si rarius sit, accedet ad centrum.
Igitur non redibit in eundem Orbem nisi sit ejusdem densitatis cum fluido.
Eo autem in casu ostensum est, quod revolveretur eadem lege cum partibus
fluidi à centro Vorticis æqualiter distantibus.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Ergo solidum quod in Vortice revolvitur & in eundem Orbem
semper redit, relativè quiescit in fluido cui innatat.

_Corol. 2._ Et si vortex sit quoad densitatem uniformis, corpus idem ad
quamlibet à centro Vorticis distantiam revolvi potest.

_Scholium._

[Illustration]

Hinc liquet Planetas à Vorticibus corporeis non deferri. Nam Planetæ
secundum Hypothesin _Copernicæam_ circa Solem delati revolvuntur in
Ellipsibus umbilicum habentibus in Sole, & radiis ad Solem ductis areas
describunt temporibus proportionales. At partes Vorticis tali motu revolvi
nequeunt. Designent AD, BE, CF, orbes tres circa Solem S descriptos, quorum
extimus CF circulus sit Soli concentricus, & interiorum duorum Aphelia sint
A, B, & Perihelia D, E. Ergo corpus quod revolvitur in orbe CF, radio ad
Solem ducto areas temporibus proportionales describendo, movebitur uniformi
cum motu. Corpus autem quod revolvitur in Orbe BE, tardiùs movebitur in
Aphelio B & velociùs in Perihelio C, secundum leges Astronomicas; cum tamen
secundum leges Mechanicas materia Vorticis in spatio angustiore inter A & C
velociùs moveri debeat quàm in spatio latiore inter D & F; id est, in
Aphelio velociùs quàm in Perihelio. Quæ duo repugnant inter se. Sic in
principio Signi Virginis, ubi Aphelium Martis jam versatur, distantia inter
orbes Martis & Veneris est ad distantiam eorundem orbium in principio Signi
Piscium ut tria ad duo circiter, & propterea materia Vorticis inter Orbes
illos in principio Piscium debet esse velocior quàm in principio Virginis
in ratione trium ad duo. Nam quo angustius est spatium per quod eadem
Materiæ quantitas eodem revolutionis unius tempore transit, eo majori cum
velocitate transire debet. Igitur si Terra in hac Materia coelesti relativè
quiescens ab ea deferretur, & una circa Solem revolveretur, foret hujus
velocitas in principio Piscium ad ejusdem velocitatem in principio Virginis
in ratione sesquialtera. Unde Solis motus diurnus apparens in principio
Virginis major esset quàm minutorum primorum septuaginta, & in principio
Piscium minor quàm minutorum quadraginta & octo: cum tamen (experientia
teste) apparens iste Solis motus major sit in principio Piscium quàm in
principio Virginis, & propterea Terra velocior in principio Virginis quàm
in principio Piscium. Itaq; Hypothesis Vorticum cum Phænomenis Astronomicis
omninò pugnat, & non tam ad explicandos quàm ad perturbandos motus
coelestes conducit. Quomodo verò motus isti in spatiis liberis absque
Vorticibus peraguntur intelligi potest ex Libro primo, & in Mundi Systemate
pleniùs docebitur.

       *       *       *       *       *


De Mundi Systemate

LIBER TERTIUS

In Libris præcedentibus principia Philosophiæ tradidi, non tamen
Philosophica sed Mathematica tantum, ex quibus videlicet in rebus
Philosophicis disputari possit. Hæc sunt motuum & virium leges &
conditiones, quæ ad Philosophiam maximè spectant. Eadem tamen, ne sterilia
videantur, illustravi Scholiis quibusdam Philosophicis, ea tractans quæ
generalia sunt, & in quibus Philosophia maximè fundari videtur, uti
corporum densitatem & resistentiam, spatia corporibus vacua, motumque Lucis
& Sonorum. Superest ut ex iisdem principiis doceamus constitutionem
Systematis Mundani. De hoc argumento composueram Librum tertium methodo
populari, ut à pluribus legeretur. Sed quibus Principia posita satis
intellecta non fuerint, ij vim consequentiarum minimè percipient, neque
præjudicia deponent quibus à multis retro annis insueverunt: & propterea ne
res in disputationes trahatur, summam libri illius transtuli in
Propositiones, more Mathematico, ut ab iis solis legantur qui principia
prius evolverint. Veruntamen quoniam Propositiones ibi quam plurimæ
occurrant, quæ Lectoribus etiam Mathematicè doctis moram nimiam injicere
possint, author esse nolo ut quisquam eas omnes evolvat; suffecerit siquis
Definitiones, Leges motuum & sectiones tres priores Libri primi sedulò
legat, dein transeat ad hunc Librum de Mundi Systemate, & reliquas Librorum
priorum Propositiones hic citatas pro lubitu consulat.

HYPOTHESES.

Hypoth. I. _Causas rerum naturalium non plures admitti debere, quàm quæ &
vera sint & earum Phænomenis explicandis sufficiunt._

Natura enim simplex est & rerum causis superfluis non luxuriat.

Hypoth. II. _Ideoque effectuum naturalium ejusdem generis eædem sunt
causæ._

Uti respirationis in Homine & in Bestia; descensus lapidum in _Europa_ & in
_America_; Lucis in Igne culinari & in Sole; reflexionis lucis in Terra &
in Planetis.

Hypoth. III. _Corpus omne in alterius cujuscunque generis corpus
transformari posse, & qualitatum gradus omnes intermedios sucessivè
induere._

Hypoth. IV. _Centrum Systematis Mundani quiescere._

Hoc ab omnibus concessum est, dum aliqui Terram alii Solem in centro
quiescere contendat.

Hypoth. V. _Planetas circumjoviales, radiis ad centrum Jovis ductis, areas
describere temporibus proportionales, eorumque tempora periodica esse in
ratione sesquialtera distantiarum ab ipsius centro._

Constat ex observationibus Astronomicis. Orbes horum Planetarum non
differunt sensibiliter à circulis Jovi concentricis, & motus eorum in his
circulis uniformes deprehenduntur. Tempora verò periodica esse in
sesquialtera semidiametrorum orbium consentiunt Astronomici: &
_Flamstedius_, qui omnia Micrometro & per Eclipses Satellitum accuratius
definivit, literis ad me datis, quinetiam numeris suis mecum communicatis,
significavit rationem illam sesquialteram tam accuratè obtinere, quàm sit
possibile sensu deprehendere. Id quòd ex Tabula sequente manifestum est.

_Satellitum tempora periodica._

1d. 18h. 28'-3/5.   3d. 13h. 17'-9/10.   7d. 3h. 59'-3/5.   16d. 18h.
5'-1/5.

_Distantiæ Satellitum à centro Jovis._

  Ex Observationibus        | 1.     | 2      | 3      | 4
                            +--------+--------+--------+---------
  Cassini                   | 5.     | 8.     | 13.    | 23.     }
  Borelli                   | 5-2/3. | 8-2/3. | 14.    | 24-2/3. } Semi-
  Tounlei per Micromet.     | 5,51.  | 8,78.  | 13,47. | 24,72.  } diam.
  Flamstedii per Microm.    | 5,31.  | 8,85.  | 13,98. | 24,23.  } Jovis.
  Flamst. per Eclips. Satel.| 5,578. | 8,876. | 14,159.| 24,903. }
  --------------------------+--------+--------+--------+---------
  Ex temporibus periodicis. | 5,578. | 8,878. | 14,168.| 24,968.

Hypoth. VI. _Planetas quinque primarios Mercurium, Venerem, Martem, Jovem &
Saturnum Orbibus suis Solem cingere._

Mercurium & Venerem circa Solem revolvi ex eorum phasibus lunaribus
demonstratur. Plenâ facie lucentes ultra Solem siti sunt, dimidiatâ è
regione Solis, falcatâ cis Solem; per discum ejus ad modum macularum
nonnunquam transeuntes. Ex Martis quoque plena facie prope Solis
conjunctionem, & gibbosa in quadraturis, certum est quod is Solem ambit. De
Jove etiam & Saturno idem ex eorum phasibus semper plenis demonstratur.

Hypoth. VII. _Planetarum quinque primariorum, & (vel Solis circa Terram
vel) Terræ circa Solem tempora periodica esse in ratione sesquialtera
mediocrium distantiarum à Sole._

Hæc à _Keplero_ inventa ratio in confesso est apud omnes. Eadem utique sunt
tempora periodica, eædemq; orbium dimensiones, sive Planetæ circa Terram,
sive iidem circa Solem revolvantur. Ac de mensura quidem temporum
periodicorum convenit inter Astronomos universos. Magnitudines autem Orbium
_Keplerus_ & _Bullialdus_ omnium diligentissimè ex Observationibus
determinaverunt: & distantiæ mediocres, quæ temporibus periodicis
respondent, non differunt sensibiliter à distantiis quas illi invenerunt,
suntque inter ipsas ut plurimum intermediæ; uti in Tabula sequente videre
licet.

_Planetarum ac Telluris Distantiæ mediocres à Sole._

                      Satur.   Jovis      Mart.  Tellur.   Vener.  Mercur.
  Secundum Keplerum   951000.  519650.  152350.  100000.   72400.   38806.
  Secundum Bullialdum 954198.  522520.  152350.  100000.   72398.   38585.
  Secundum tempora    953806.  520116.  152399.  100000.   72333.   38710.
     periodica

De distantiis Mercurii & Veneris à Sole disputandi non est locus, cum hæ
per eorum Elongationes à Sole determinentur. De distantiis etiam superiorum
Planetarum à Sole tollitur omnis disputatio per Eclipses Satellitum Jovis.
Etenim per Eclipses illas determinatur positio umbræ quam Jupiter projicit,
& eo nomine habetur Jovis longitudo Heliocentrica. Ex longitudinibus autem
Heliocentrica & Geocentrica inter se collatis determinatur distantia Jovis.

Hypoth. VIII. _Planetas primarios radiis ad Terram ductis areas describere
temporibus minimè proportionales; at radiis ad Solem ductis areas
temporibus proportionales percurrere._

Nam respectu terræ nunc progrediuntur, nunc stationarii sunt, nunc etiam
regrediuntur: At Solis respectu semper progrediuntur, idque propemodum
uniformi cum motu, sed paulo celerius tamen in Periheliis ac tardius in
Apheliis, sic ut arearum æquabilis sit descriptio. Propositio est
Astronomis notissima, & in Jove apprimè demonstratur per Eclipses
Satellitum, quibus Eclipsibus Heliocentricas Planetæ hujus longitudines &
distantias à Sole determinari diximus.

Hypoth. IX. _Lunam radio ad centrum terræ ducto aream tempori
proportionalem describere._

Patet ex Lunæ motu apparente cum ipsius diametro apparente collato.
Perturbatur autem motus Lunaris aliquantulum à vi Solis, sed errorum
insensibiles minutias Physicis in hisce Hypothesibus negligo.

Prop. I. Theor. I.

    _Vires, quibus Planetæ circumjoviales perpetuo retrahuntur à motibus
    rectilineis & in orbibus suis retinentur, respicere centrum Jovis, &
    esse reciproce ut quadrata distantiarum locorum ab eodem centro._

Patet pars prior Propositionis per Hypoth. V. & Prop. II. vel III. Lib. I.
& pars posterior per Hypoth. V. & Corol. 6. Prop. IV. ejusdem Libri.

Prop. II. Theor. II.

    _Vires, quibus Planetæ primarii perpetuo retrahuntur à motibus
    rectilineis, & in Orbibus suis retinentur, respicere Solem, & esse
    reciproce ut quadrata distantiarum ab ipsius centro._

Patet pars prior Propositionis per Hypoth. VIII. & Prop. II. Lib. I. & pars
posterior per Hypoth. VII. & Prop. IV. ejusdem Libri. Accuratissimè autem
demonstratur hæc pars Propositionis per quietem Apheliorum. Nam aberratio
quam minima à ratione duplicata (per Corol. 1. Prop. XLV. Lib. I.) motum
Apsidum in singulis revolutionibus notabilem, in pluribus enormem efficere
deberet.

Prop. III. Theor. III.

    _Vim qua Luna retinetur in Orbe suo respicere terram, & esse reciprocò
    ut quadratum distantiæ locorum ab ipsius centro._

Patet assertionis pars prior, per Hypoth. IX. & Prop. II. vel III. Lib. I.
& pars posterior per motum tardissimum Lunaris Apogæi. Nam motus ille, qui
singulis revolutionibus est graduum tantum trium in consequentia, contemni
potest. Patet enim, per Corol. 1. Prop. XLV. Lib. I. quod si distantia Lunæ
à centro Terræ dicatur D, vis à qua motus talis oriatur, sit reciproce ut
D^{2-4/243}, id est reciprocè ut ea ipsius D dignitas, cujus index est
2-4/243, hoc est in ratione distantiæ paulo majore quam duplicata inverse,
sed quæ vicibus 60¾ propius ad duplicatam quam ad triplicatam accedit.
Tantillus autem accessus meritò contemnendus est. Oritur verò ab actione
Solis (uti posthac dicetur) & propterea hic negligendus est. Restat igitur
ut vis illa, quæ ad Terram spectat, sit reciprocè ut D^2; id quod etiam
plenius constabit, conferendo hanc vim cum vi gravitatis, ut fit in
Propositione sequente.

Prop. IV. Theor. IV.

    _Lunam gravitare in terram, & vi gravitatis retrahi semper à motu
    rectilineo, & in orbe suo retineri._

Lunæ distantia mediocris à centro Terræ est semidiametrorum terrestrium,
secundum plerosque Astronomorum 59, secundum _Vendelinum_ 60, secundum
_Copernicum_ 60-1/3, secundum _Kircherum_ 62½, & secundum _Tychonem_ 56½.
Ast _Tycho_, & quotquot ejus Tabulas refractionum sequuntur, constituendo
refractiones Solis & Lunæ (omnino contra naturam Lucis) majores quam
fixarum, idque scrupulis quasi quatuor vel quinque, auxerunt Parallaxin
Lunæ scrupulis totidem, hoc est quasi duodecima vel decima quinta parte
totius parallaxeos. Corrigatur iste error, & distantia evadet quasi 61
semidiametrorum terrestrium, fere ut ab aliis assignatum est. Assumamus
distantiam mediocrem sexaginta semidiametrorum; & Lunarem periodum respectu
fixarum compleri diebus 27, horis 7, minutis primis 43, ut ab Astronomis
statuitur; atque ambitum Terræ esse pedum Parisiensium 123249600, uti à
Gallis mensurantibus nuper definitum est: & si Luna motu omni privari
fingatur, ac dimitti ut, urgente vi illa omni qua in Orbe suo retinetur,
descendat in terram; hæc spatio minuti primi cadendo describet pedes
Parisienses 15-1/12. Colligitur hoc ex calculo, vel per Propositionem xxxvi
Libri primi, vel (quod eodem recedit) per Scholium Propositionis quartæ
ejusdem Libri, confecto. Unde cum vis illa accedendo ad terram augeatur in
duplicata distantiæ ratione inversâ, adeoque ad superficiem Terræ major sit
vicibus 60 × 60 quam ad Lunam, corpus vi illa in regionibus nostris cadendo
describere deberet spatio minuti unius primi pedes Parisienses 60 × 60 ×
15-1/12, & spatio minuti unius secundi pedes 15-1/12. Atqui corpora in
regionibus nostris vi gravitatis cadendo describunt tempore minuti unius
secundi pedes Parisienses 15-1/12, uti _Hugenius_, factis pendulorum
experimentis & computo inde inito, demonstravit: & propterea vis qua Luna
in orbe suo retinetur, illa ipsa est quam nos gravitatem dicere solemus.
Nam si gravitas ab ea diversa est, corpora viribus utrisque conjunctis
Terram petendo duplo velocius descendent, & spatio minuti unius secundi
cadendo describent pedes Parisienses 30-1/6: omnino contra experientiam.

Calculus hic fundatur in Hypothesi quod Terra quiescit. Nam si Terra & Luna
circa Solem moveantur, & interea quoque circa commune gravitatis centrum
revolvantur: distantia centrorum Lunæ ac Terræ ab invicem erit 60½
semidiametrorum terrestrium; uti computationem (per Prop. LX. Lib. I.)
ineunti patebit.

Prop. V. Theor. V.

    _Planetas circumjoviales gravitare in Jovem, & circumsolares in Solem,
    & vi gravitatis suæ retrahi semper à motibus rectilineis, & in orbibus
    curvilineis retineri._

Nam revolutiones Planetarum circumjovialium circa Jovem, & Mercurii ac
Veneris reliquorumque circumsolarium circa Solem sunt Phænomena ejusdem
generis cum revolutione Lunæ circa Terram; & propterea per Hypoth. II. à
causis ejusdem generis dependent: præsertim cùm demonstratum sit quod
vires, à quibus revolutiones illæ dependent, respiciant centra Jovis ac
Solis, & recedendo à Jove & Sole decrescant eadem ratione ac lege, qua vis
gravitatis decrescit in recessu à Terra.

_Corol. 1._ Igitur gravitas datur in Planetas universos. Nam Venerem,
Mercurium cæterosque esse corpora ejusdem generis cum Jove nemo dubitat.
Certe Planeta Hugenianus, eodem argumento quo Satellites Jovis gravitant in
Jovem, gravis est in Saturnum. Et cum attractio omnis (per motus legem
tertiam) mutua sit, Saturnus vicissim gravitabit in Planetam Hugenianum.
Eodem argumento Jupiter in Satellites suos omnes, Terraque in Lunam, & Sol
in Planetas omnes primarios gravitabit.

_Corol. 2._ Gravitatem, quæ Planetam unumquemque respicit, ese reciprocè ut
quadratum distantiæ locorum ab ipsius centro.

Prop. VI. Theor. VI.

    _Corpora omnia in Planetas singulos gravitare, & pondera eorum in
    eundem quemvis Planetam, paribus distantiis à centro Planetæ,
    proportionalia esse quantitati materiæ in singulis._

Descensus gravium omnium in Terram (dempta saltem inæquali retardatione quæ
ex Aeris perexigua resistentia oritur) æqualibus temporibus fieri jamdudum
observarunt alii; & accuratissimè quidem notare licet æqualitatem temporum
in Pendulis. Rem tentavi in auro, argento, plumbo, vitro, arena, sale
communi, ligno, aqua, tritico. Comparabam pixides duas ligneas rotundas &
æquales. Unam implebam ligno, & idem auri pondus suspendebam (quàm potui
exactè) in alterius centro oscillationis. Pixides ab æqualibus pedum
undecim filis pendentes constituebant Pendula, quoad pondus, figuram &
aeris resistentia omnino paria: Et paribus oscillationibus juxta positæ
ibant unà & redibant diutissime. Proinde copia materiæ in auro (per Corol.
1. & 6. Prop. XXIV. Lib. II.) erat ad copiam materiæ in ligno, ut vis
motricis actio in totum aurum ad ejusdem actionem in totum lignum; hoc est
ut pondus ad pondus. Et sit in cæteris. In corporibus ejusdem ponderis
differentia materiæ, quæ vel minor esset quàm pars millesima materiæ
totius, his experimentis manifestò deprehendi potuit. Jam verò naturam
gravitatis in Planetas eandem esse atque in Terram non est dubium. Elevari
enim fingantur corpora hæc Terrestria ad usque Orbem Lunæ, & una cum Lunâ
motu omni privata demitti, ut in Terram simul cadant; & per jam ante
ostensa certum est quod temporibus æqualibus describent æqualia Spatia cum
Luna, adeoque quod sunt ad quantitatem materiæ in Luna, ut pondera sua ad
ipsius pondus. Porrò quoniam Satellites Jovis temporibus revolvuntur quæ
sunt in ratione sesquialtera distantiarum a centro Jovis, erunt eorum
gravitates acceleratrices in Jovem reciprocè ut quadrata distantiarum à
centro Jovis; & propterea in æqualibus à Jove distantiis eorum gravitates
acceleratrices evaderent æquales. Proinde temporibus æqualibus ab æqualibus
altitudinibus cadendo describerent æqualia Spatia, perinde ut fit in
gravibus, in hac Terra nostra. Et eodem argumento Planetæ circumsolares ab
æqualibus à Sole distantiis dimissi, descensu suo in Solem æqualibus
temporibus æqualia spatia describerent. Vires autem, quibus corpora
inæqualia æqualiter accelerantur, sunt ut corpora; hoc est pondera ut
quantitates materiæ in Planetis. Porrò Jovis & ejus Satellitum pondera in
Solem proportionalia esse quantitatibus materiæ eorum, patet ex motu
Satellitum quam maxime regulari; per Corol. 3. Prop. LXV. Lib. I. Nam si
horum aliqui magis traherentur in Solem pro quantitate materiæ suæ quàm
cæteri, motus Satellitum (per Corol. 2. Prop. LXV. Lib. I.) ex inæqualitate
attractionis perturbarentur. Si (paribus à Sole distantiis) Satelles
aliquis gravior esset in Solem pro quantitate materiæ suæ, quam Jupiter pro
quantitate materiæ suæ, in ratione quacunque data, puta d ad e: distantia
inter centrum Solis & centrum Orbis Satellitis major semper foret quam
distantia inter centrum Solis & centrum Jovis in ratione dimidiata quam
proximè; uti calculis quibusdam initis inveni. Et si Satelles minus gravis
esset in Solem in ratione illa d ad e, distantia centri Orbis Satellitis à
Sole minor foret quàm distantia centri Jovis à Sole in ratione illa
dimidiata. Igitur si in æqualibus à Sole distantiis, gravitas acceleratrix
Satellitis cujusvis in Solem major esset vel minor quàm gravitas
acceleratrix Jovis in Solem, parte tantum millesima gravitatis totius;
foret distantia centri Orbis Satellitis à Sole major vel minor quàm
distantia Jovis à Sole parte 1/2600 distantiæ totius, id est parte quinta
distantiæ Satellitis extimi à centro Jovis: Quæ quidem Orbis excentricitas
foret valde sensibilis. Sed Orbes Satellitum sunt Jovi concentrici, &
propterea gravitates acceleratrices Jovis & Satellitum in Solem æquantur
inter se. Et eodem argumento pondera Saturni & Comitis ejus in Solem, in
æqualibus à Sole distantiis, sunt ut quantitates materiæ in ipsis: Et
pondera Lunæ ac Terræ in Solem vel nulla sunt, vel earum massis accuratè
proportionalia.

Quinetiam pondera partium singularum Planetæ cujusque in alium quemcunque
sunt inter se ut materia in partibus singulis. Nam si partes aliquæ plus
gravitarent, aliæ minus, quàm pro quantitate materiæ, Planeta totus, pro
genere partium quibus maximè abundet, gravitaret magis vel minus quàm pro
quantitate materiæ totius. Sed nec refert utrum partes illæ externæ sint
vel internæ. Nam si verbi gratia corpora Terrestria, quæ apud nos sunt, in
Orbem Lunæ elevari fingantur, & conferantur cum corpore Lunæ: Si horum
pondera essent ad pondera partium externarum Lunæ ut quantitates materiæ in
iisdem, ad pondera verò partium internarum in majori vel minori ratione,
forent eadem ad pondus Lunæ totius in majori vel minori ratione: contra
quam supra ostensum est.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc pondera corporum non pendent ab eorum formis & texturis.
Nam si cum formis variari possent, forent majora vel minora pro varietate
formarum in æquali materia; omninò contra experientiam.

_Corol. 2._ Igitur corpora universa quæ circa Terram sunt, gravia sunt in
Terram; & pondera omnium, quæ æqualiter à centro Terræ distant, sunt ut
quantitates materiæ in iisdem. Nam si æther aut corpus aliud quodcunque vel
gravitate omnino destitueretur vel pro quantitate materiæ suæ minus
gravitaret, quoniam id non differt ab aliis corporibus nisi in forma
materiæ, posset idem per mutationem formæ gradatim transmutari in corpus
ejusdem conditionis cum iis quæ pro quantitate materiæ quam maximè
gravitant, (per Hypoth. III.) & vicissim corpora maxime gravia, formam
illius gradatim induendo, possent gravitatem suam gradatim amittere. Ac
proinde pondera penderent à formis corporum, possentque cum formis variari,
contra quam probatum est in Corollario superiore.

_Corol. 3._ Itaque Vacuum necessariò datur. Nam si spatia omnia plena
essent, gravitas specifica fluidi quo regio aeris impleretur, ob summam
densitatem materiæ, nil cederet gravitati specificæ argenti vivi, vel auri,
vel corporis alterius cujuscunque densissimi; & propterea nec aurum neque
aliud quodcunque corpus in aere descendere posset. Nam corpora in fluidis,
nisi specificè graviora sint, minimè descendunt.

_Corol. 4._ Gravitatem diversi generis esse à vi magnetica. Nam attractio
magnetica non est ut materia attracta. Corpora aliqua magis trahuntur, alia
minus, plurima non trahuntur. Estque vis magnetica longe major pro
quantitate materiæ quam vis gravitatis: sed & in eodem corpore intendi
potest & remitti; in recessu verò à magnete decrescit in ratione distantiæ
plusquam duplicata, per Prop. LXXXV. Lib. I.; propterea quod vis longe
fortior sit in contactu, quam cum attrahentia vel minimum separantur ab
invicem.

Prop. VII. Theor. VII.

    _Gravitatem in corpora universa fieri, eamque proportionalem esse
    quantitati materiæ in singulis._

Planetas omnes in se mutuò graves esse jam ante probavimus, ut & gravitatem
in unumquemque seorsim spectatum esse reciprocè ut quadratum distantiæ
locorum à centro Planetæ. Et inde consequens est, (per Prop. LXIX. Lib. I.
& ejus Corollaria) gravitatem in omnes proportionalem esse materiæ in
iisdem.

Porrò cum Planetæ cujusvis A partes omnes graves sint in Planetam quemvis
B, & gravitas partis cujusque sit ad gravitatem totius, ut materia partis
ad materiam totius, & actioni omni reactio (per motus Legem tertiam)
æqualis sit; Planeta B in partes omnes Planetæ A vicissim gravitabit, &
erit gravitas sua in partem unamquamque ad gravitatem suam in totum, ut
materia partis ad materiam totius.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 1._ Oritur igitur & componitur gravitas in Planetam totum ex
gravitate in partes singulas. Cujus rei exempla habemus in attractionibus
Magneticis & Electricis. Oritur enim attractio omnis in totum ex
attractionibus in partes singulas. Res intelligetur in gravitate,
concipiendo Planetas plures minores in unum Globum coire & Planetam majorem
componere. Nam vis totius ex viribus partium componentium oriri debebit.
Siquis objiciat quod corpora omnia, quæ apud nos sunt, hac lege gravitare
deberent in se mutuò, cùm tamen ejusmodi gravitas neutiquam sentiatur:
Respondeo quod gravitas in hæc corpora, cum sit ad gravitatem in Terram
totam ut sunt hæc corpora ad Terram totam, longe minor est quam quæ sentiri
possit.

_Corol. 2._ Gravitatio in singulas corporis particulas æquales est
reciprocè ut quadratum distantiæ locorum à particulis. Patet per Corol. 3.
Prop. LXXIV. Lib. I.

Prop. VIII. Theor. VIII.

    _Si Globorum duorum in se mutuò gravitantium materia undique, in
    regionibus quæ à centris æqualiter distant, homogenea sit: erit pondus
    Globi alterutrius in alterum reciprocè ut quadratum distantiæ inter
    centra._

Postquam invenissem gravitatem in Planetam totum oriri & componi ex
gravitatibus in partes; & esse in partes singulas reciprocè proportionalem
quadratis distantiarum à partibus: dubitabam an reciproca illa proportio
duplicata obtineret accuratè in vi tota ex viribus pluribus composita, an
verò quam proximè. Nam fieri posset ut proportio illa in majoribus
distantiis satis obtineret, at prope superficiem Planetæ, ob inæquales
particularum distantias & situs dissimiles, notabiliter erraret. Tandem
verò, per Prop. LXXV. Libri primi & ipsius Corollaria, intellexi veritatem
Propositionis de qua hic agitur.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc inveniri & inter se comparari possunt pondera corporum in
diversos Planetas. Nam pondera corporum æqualium circum Planetas in
circulis revolventium sunt (per Prop. IV. Lib. I.) ut diametri circulorum
directè & quadrata temporum periodicorum inversè; & pondera ad superficies
Planetarum aliasve quasvis à centro distantias majora sunt vel minora (per
hanc Propositionem) in duplicata ratione distantiarum inversa. Sic ex
temporibus periodicis Veneris circa Solem dierum 224-2/3, Satellitis extimi
circumjovialis circa Jovem dierum 16¾, Satellitis Hugeniani circa Saturnum
dierum 15 & horarum 22-2/3, & Lunæ circa Terram 27 _dier._ 7 hor. 43 min.
collatis cum distantia mediocri Veneris à Sole; cum Elongatione maxima
Heliocentrica Satellitis extimi circumjovialis, quæ (in mediocri Jovis à
Sole distantia juxta observationes _Flamstedii_) est 8'. 13"; cum
elongatione maximæ Heliocentrica Satellitis Saturnii 3'. 20"; & cum
distantia Lunæ à Terra, ex Hypothesi quod Solis parallaxis horizontalis seu
semidiameter Terræ è Sole visæ sit quasi 20"; calculum ineundo inveni quod
corporum æqualium & à Sole, Jove, Saturno ac Terra æqualiter distantium
pondera in Solem, Jovem, Saturnum ac Terram forent ad invicem ut 1, 1/1100,
1/2360 & 1/28700 respectivè. Est autem Solis semidiameter mediocris
apparens quasi 16'. 6". Illam Jovis è Sole visam _Flamstedius_, ex umbræ
Jovialis diametro per Eclipses Satellitum inventa, determinavit esse ad
elongationem Satellitis extimi ut 1 ad 24,9 adeoque cum elongatio illa sit
8'. 13" semidiameter Jovis è Sole visi erit 19"¾. Diameter Saturni est ad
diametrum Annuli ejus ut 4 ad 9, & diameter annuli è Sole visi (mensurante
_Flamstedio_) 50", adeoque semidiameter Saturnie è Sole visi 11". Malim
dicere 10" vel 9", propterea quod globus Saturni per lucis inæqualem
refrangibilitatem nonnihil dilatatur. Hinc inito calculo prodeunt veræ
Solis, Jovis, Saturni ac Terræ semidiametri ad invicem ut 10000, 1063, 889,
& 208. Unde cum pondera æqualium corporum à centris Solis, Jovis, Saturni
ac Telluris æqualiter distantium sint in Solem, Jovem, Saturnum ac Terram
ut 1, 1/1100, 1/2360, 1/28700 respective, & auctis vel diminutis distantiis
diminuuntur vel augentur pondera in duplicata ratione; erunt pondera
eorundem æqualium corporum in Solem, Jovem, Saturnum & Terram, in
distantiis 10000, 1063, 889 & 208 ab eorum centris, atque adeo in eorum
superficiebus versantium, ut 10000, 804½, 536 & 805½ respectivè. Pondera
corporum in superficie Lunæ ferè duplo minora esse quam pondera corporum in
superficie Terræ dicemus in sequentibus.

_Corol. 2._ Igitur pondera corporum æqualium, in superficiebus Terræ &
Planetarum, sunt fere in ratione dimidiata diametrorum apparentium è Sole
visarum. De Terræ quidem diametro è Sole visa nondum constat. Hanc assumpsi
40", propterea quod observationes _Kepleri_, _Riccioli_ & _Vendelini_ non
multo majorem esse permittunt; eam _Horroxii_ & _Flamstedii_ observationes
paulo minorem adstruere videntur. Et malui in excessu peccare. Quòd si
fortè diameter illa & gravitas in superficie Terræ mediocris sit inter
diametros Planetarum & gravitatem in eorum superficiebus: quoniam Saturni,
Jovis, Martis, Veneris & Mercurii è Sole visorum diametri sunt 18", 39"½,
8", 28", 20" circiter, erit diameter Terræ quasi 24", adeoque Parallaxis
Solis quasi 12", ut _Horroxius_ & _Flamstedius_ propemodum statuere. Sed
diameter paulo major melius congruit cum Regula hujus Corollarii.

_Corol. 3._ Innotescit etiam quantitas materiæ in Planetis singulis. Nam
quantitates illæ sunt ut Planetarum Vires in distantiis à se æqualibus; id
est in Sole, Jove, Saturno ac Terra ut 1, 1/1100, 1/2360, 1/28700
respectivè. Si Parallaxis Solis statuatur minor quam 20", debebit quantitas
materiæ in Terra diminui in triplicata ratione.

_Corol. 4._ Innotescunt etiam densitates Planetarum. Nam corporum æqualium
& homogeneorum pondera in Sphæras homogeneas in superficiebus Sphærarum,
sunt ut Sphærarum diametri per Prop. LXXII. Lib. I. ideoque Sphærarum
heterogenearum densitates sunt ut pondera applicata ad diametros. Erant
autem veræ Solis, Saturni, Jovis ac Terræ diametri ad invicem ut 10000,
889, 1063 & 208, & pondera in eosdem ut 10000, 536, 804½ & 805½, &
propterea densitates sunt ut 100, 60, 76, 387. Densitas autem Terræ, quæ
hic colligitur, non pendet à Parallaxi Solis, sed determinatur per
parallaxin Lunæ, & propterea hic recte definitur. Est igitur Sol paulo
densior quàm Jupiter, & Terra multo densior quàm Sol.

_Corol. 5._ Planetarum autem densitates inter se fere sunt in ratione
composita ex ratione distantiarum à Sole & ratione dimidiata diametrorum
apparentium è Sole visarum. Nempe Saturni, Jovis, Terræ & Lunæ densitates
60, 76, 387 & 700, fere sunt ut distantiarum reciproca 1/9538, 1/5201,
1/1000 & 1/1000, ducta in radices diametrorum apparentium 18", 39"½, 40", &
11". Diximus utique, in Corollario secundo, gravitatem ad superficies
Planetarum esse quam proximè in ratione dimidiata apparentium diametrorum è
Sole visarum; & in Lemmate quarto densitates esse ut gravitates illæ
applicatæ ad diametros veras: ideoque densitates fere sunt ut radices
diametrorum apparentium applicatæ ad diametros veras, hoc est reciproce ut
distantiæ Planetarum à Sole ductæ in radices diametrorum apparentium.
Collocavit igitur Deus Planetas in diversas distantiis à Sole, ut quilibet
pro gradu densitatis calore Solis majore vel minore fruatur. Aqua nostra,
si Terra locaretur in orbe Saturne, rigesceret, si in orbe Mercurii in
vapores statim abiret. Nam lux Solis, cui calor proportionalis est,
septuplo densior est in orbe Mercurii quàm apud nos; & Thermometro expertus
sum quod septuplo Solis æstivi calore aqua ebullit. Dubium verò non est
quin materia Mercurii ad calorem accommodetur, & propterea densior sit hac
nostra; cum materia omnis densior ad operationes Naturales obeundas majorem
calorem requirat.

Prop. IX. Theor. IX.

    _Gravitatem pergendo à superficiebus Planetarum deorsum decrescere in
    ratione distantiarum à centro quam proximè._

Si materia Planetæ quoad densitatem uniformis esset, obtineret hæc
Propositio accuratè: per Prop. LXXIII. Lib. I. Error igitur tantus est,
quantus ab inæquabili densitate oriri possit.

Prop. X. Theor. X.

    _Motus Planetarum in Coelis diutissimè conservari posse._

In Scholio Propositionis XL. Lib. II. ostensum est quod globus Aquæ
congelatæ in Aere nostro, liberè movendo & longitudinem semidiametri suæ
describendo, ex resistentia Aeris amitteret motus sui partem 1/3200.
Obtinet autem eadem proportio quam proximè (per Prop. XL. Lib. II.) in
globis utcunque magnis & velocibus. Jam verò Globum Terræ nostræ densiorem
esse quam si totus ex Aqua constaret, sic colligo. Si Globus hicce totus
esset aqueus, quæcunque rariora essent quàm aqua, ob minorem specificam
gravitatem emergerent & supernatarent. Eaque de causa Globus terreus aquis
undique coopertus, si rarior esset quam aqua, emergeret alicubi, & aqua
omnis inde defluens congregaretur in regione opposita. Et par est ratio
Terræ nostræ maribus magna ex parte circumdatæ. Hæc si densior non esset,
emergeret ex maribus, & parte sui pro gradu levitatis extaret ex Aqua,
maribus omnibus in regionem oppositam confluentibus. Eodem argumento maculæ
Solares leviores sunt quàm materia lucida Solaris cui supernatant. Et in
formatione qualicunque Planetarum, materia omnis gravior, quo tempore massa
tota fluida erat, centrum petebat. Unde cum Terra communis suprema quasi
duplo gravior sit quam aqua, & paulo inferius in fodinis quasi triplo vel
quadruplo aut etiam quintuplo gravior reperiatur: verisimile est quod copia
materiæ totius in Terra quasi quintuplo vel sextuplo major sit quàm si tota
ex aqua constaret; præsertim cum Terram quasi quintuplo densiorem esse quàm
Jovem jam ante ostensum sit. Igitur si Jupiter paulo densior sit quàm aqua,
hic spatio dierum viginti & unius, quibus longitudinem 320 semidiametrorum
suarum describit, amitteret in Medio ejusdem densitatis cum Aere nostro
motus sui partem fere decimam. Verum cum resistentia Mediorum minuatur in
ratione ponderis ac densitatis, sic ut aqua, quæ vicibus 13-2/3 levior est
quàm argentum vivum, minus resistat in eadem ratione; & aer, qui vicibus
800 levior est quàm aqua, minus resistat in eadem ratione: si ascendatur in
coelos ubi pondus Medii, in quo Planetæ moventur, diminuitur in immensum,
resistentia prope cessabit.

Prop. XI. Theor. XI.

    _Commune centrum gravitas Terræ Solis & Planetarum omnium quiescere._

Nam centrum illud (per Legum Corol. 4.) vel quiescet vel progredietur
uniformiter in directum. Sed centro illo semper progrediente, centrum Mundi
quoque movebitur contra Hypothesin quartam.

Prop. XII. Theor. XII.

    _Solem motu perpetuo agitari sed nunquam longe recedere à communi
    gravitatis centro Planetarum omnium._

Nam cum, per Corol. 3. Prop. VIII. materia in Sole sit ad materiam in Jove
ut 1100 ad 1, & distantia Jovis à Sole sit ad semidiametrum Solis in eadem
ratione circiter; commune centrum gravitatis Jovis & Solis incidet fere in
superficiem Solis. Eodem argumento cùm materia in Sole sit ad materiam in
Saturno ut 2360 ad 1, & distantia Saturni à Sole sit ad semidiametrum Solis
in ratione paulo minori: incidet commune centrum gravitatis Saturni & Solis
in punctum paulo infra superficiem Solis. Et ejusdem calculi vestigiis
insistendo si Terra & Planetæ omnes ex una Solis parte consisterent,
commune omnium centrum gravitatis vix integra Solis diametro à centro Solis
distaret. Aliis in casibus distantia centrorum semper minor est. Et
propterea cum centrum illud gravitatis perpetuo quiescit, Sol pro vario
Planetarum situ in omnes partes movebitur, sed à centro illo nunquam longe
recedet.

_Corol._ Hinc commune gravitatis centrum Terræ, Solis & Planetarum omnium
pro centro Mundi habendum est. Nam cùm Terra, Sol & Planetæ omnes gravitent
in se mutuò, & propterea, pro vi gravitatis suæ, secundum leges motûs
perpetuò agitentur: perspicuum est quod horum centra mobilia pro Mundi
centro quiescente haberi nequeunt. Si corpus illud in centro locandum esset
in quod corpora omnia maximè gravitant (uti vulgi est opinio) privilegium
istud concedendum esset Soli. Cum autem Sol moveatur, eligendum erit
punctum quiescens, à quo centrum Solis quam minimè discedit, & à quo idem
adhuc minus discederet, si modò Sol densior esset & major, ut minus
moveretur.

Prop. XIII. Theor. XIII.

    _Planetæ moventur in Ellipsibus umbilicum habentibus in centro Solis, &
    radiis ad centrum illud ductis areas describunt temporibus
    proportionales._

Disputavimus supra de his motibus ex Phænomenis. Jam cognitis motuum
principiis, ex his colligimus motus coelestes à priori. Quoniam pondera
Planetarum in Solem sunt reciprocè ut quadrata distantiarum à centro Solis;
si Sol quiesceret & Planetæ reliqui non agerent in se mutuò, forent orbes
eorum Elliptici, Solem in umbilico communi habentes, & areæ describerentur
temporibus proportionales (per Prop. I. & XI, & Corol. 1. Prop. XIII. Lib.
I.) Actiones autem Planetarum in se mutùo perexiguæ sunt (ut possint
contemni) & motus Planetarum in Ellipsibus circa Solem mobilem minus
perturbant (per Prop. LXVI. Lib. I.) quàm si motus isti circa Solem
quiescentem peragerentur.

Actio quidem Jovis in Saturnum non est omnino contemnenda. Nam gravitas in
Jovem est ad gravitatem in Solem (paribus distantiis) ut 1 ad 1100; adeoque
in conjunctione Jovis & Saturni, quoniam distantia Saturni à Jove est ad
distantiam Saturni à Sole fere ut 4 ad 9, erit gravitas Saturni in Jovem ad
gravitatem Saturni in Solem ut 81 ad 16 × 1100 seu 1 ad 217 circiter. Error
tamen omnis in motu Saturni circa Solem, à tanta in Jovem gravitate
oriundus, evitari fere potest constituendo umbilicum Orbis Saturni in
communi centro gravitatis Jovis & Solis (per Prop. LXVII. Lib. I.) &
propterea ubi maximus est vix superat minutos duos primos. In conjunctione
autem Jovis & Saturni gravitates acceleratrices Solis in Saturnum, Jovis in
Saturnum & Jovis in Solem sunt fere ut 16, 81 & {16 × 81 × 2360} ÷ 25 seu
122342, adeoque differentia gravitatum Solis in Saturnum & Jovis in
Saturnum est ad gravitatem Jovis in Solem ut 65 ad 122342 seu 1 ad 1867.
Huic autem differentiæ proportionalis est maxima Saturni efficacia ad
perturbandum motum Jovis, & propterea perturbatio orbis Jovialis longe
minor est quàm ea Saturnii. Reliquorum orbium perturbationes sunt adhuc
longe minores.

Prop. XIV. Theor. XIV.

    _Orbium Aphelia & Nodi quiescunt._

Aphelia quiescunt, per Prop. XI. Lib. I. ut & orbium plana, per ejusdem
Libri Prop. I. & quiescentibus planis quiescunt Nodi. Attamen à Planetarum
revolventium & Cometarum actionibus in se invicem orientur inæqualitates
aliquæ, sed quæ ob parvitatem contemni possunt.

_Corol. 1._ Quiescunt etiam Stellæ fixæ, propterea quod datas ad Aphelia
Nodosque positiones servant.

_Corol. 2._ Ideoque cum nulla sit earum parallaxis sensibilis ex Terræ motu
annuo oriunda, vires earum ob immensam corporum distantiam nullos edent
sensibiles effectus in regione Systematis nostri.

Prop. XV. Theor. XV.

    _Invenire Orbium transversas diametros._

Capiendæ sunt hæ in ratione sesquialtera temporum periodicorum per Prop.
XV. Lib. I. deinde sigillatim augendæ in ratione summæ massarum Solis &
Planetæ cujusque revolventis ad primam duarum mediè proportionalium inter
summam illam & Solem, per Prop. LX. Lib. I.

Prop. XVI. Prob. I.

    _Invenire Orbium Excentricitates & Aphelia._

Problema confit per Prop. XVIII. Lib. I.

Prop. XVII. Theor. XVI.

    _Planetarum motus diurnos uniformes esse, & librationem Lunæ ex ipsius
    motu diurno oriri._

Patet per motus Legem I, & Corol. 22. Prop. LXVI. Lib. I. Quoniam verò
Lunæ, circa axem suum uniformiter revolventis, dies menstruus est; hujus
facies eadem ulteriorem umbilicum orbis ipsius semper respiciet, &
propterea pro situ umbilici illius deviabit hinc inde à Terra. Hæc est
libratio in longitudinem. Nam libratio in latitudinem orta est ex
inclinatione axis Lunaris ad planum orbis. Porrò hæc ita se habere, ex
Phænomenis manifestum est.

Prop. XVIII. Theor. XVII.

    _Axes Planetarum dimetris quæ ad eosdem axes normaliter ducuntur
    minores esse._

Planetæ sublato omni motu circulari diurno figuram Sphæricam, ob æqualem
undique partium gravitatem, affectare deberent. Per motum illum circularem
fit ut partes ab axe recedentes juxta æquatorem ascendere conentur. Ideoque
materia si fluida sit ascensu suo ad æquatorem diametros adaugebit, axem
verò descensu suo ad polos diminuet. Sic Jovis diameter (consentientibus
observationibus _Cassini_ & _Flamstedii_) brevior deprehenditur inter polos
quàm ab oriente in occidentem. Eodem argumento, nisi Terra nostra paulò
altior esset sub æquatore quàm ad polos, Maria ad polos subsiderent, &
juxta æquatorem ascendendo, ibi omnia inundarent.

Prop. XIX. Prob. II.

    _Invenire proportionem axis Planetæ ad diametros eidem
    perpendiculares._

[Illustration]

Ad hujus Problematis solutionem requiritur computatio multiplex, quæ
facilius exemplis quàm præceptis addiscitur. Inito igitur calculo invenio,
per Prop. IV. Lib. I. quod vis centrifuga partium Terræ sub æquatore, ex
motu diurno oriunda, sit ad vim gravitatis ut 1 ad 290-4/5. Unde si APBQ
figuram Terræ designet revolutione Ellipseos circa axem minorem PQ genitam;
sitque ACQqca canalis aquæ plena, à polo Qq ad centrum Cc, & inde ad
æquatorem Aa pergens: debebit pondus aquæ in canalis crure ACca esse ad
pondus aquæ in crure altero QCcq ut 291 ad 290, eò quòd vis centrifuga ex
circulari motu orta partem unam è ponderis partibus 291 sustinebit &
detrahet, & pondus 290 in altero crure sustinebit partes reliquas. Porrò
(ex Propositionis XCI. Corollario secundo, Lib. I.) computationem ineundo,
invenio quod si Terra constaret ex uniformi materia, motuque omni
privaretur, & esset ejus axis PQ ad diametrum AB ut 100 ad 101: gravitas in
loco Q in Terram, foret ad gravitatem in eodem loco Q sphæram centro C
radio PC vel QC descriptam, ut 126-2/15 ad 125-2/15. Et eodem argumento
gravitas in loco A in Sphæroidem, convolutione Ellipseos APBQ circa axem AB
descriptam, est ad gravitatem in eodem loco A in Sphæram centro C radio AC
descriptam, ut 125-2/15 ad 126-2/15. Est autem gravitas in loco A in
Terram, media proportionalis inter gravitates in dictam Sphæroidem &
Sphæram, propterea quod Sphæra, diminuendo diametrum PQ in ratione 101 ad
100, vertitur in figuram Terræ; & hæc figura diminuendo in eadem ratione
diametrum tertiam, quæ diametris duabus AP, PQ perpendicularis est,
vertitur in dictam Sphæroidem, & gravitas in A, in casu utroque, diminuitur
in eadem ratione quam proximè. Est igitur gravitas in A in Sphæram centro C
radio AC descriptam, ad gravitatem in A in Terram ut 126 ad 125½, &
gravitas in loco Q in Sphæram centro C radio QC descriptam, est ad
gravitatem in loco A in Sphæram centro C radio AC descriptam, in ratione
diametrorum (per Prop. LXXII. Lib. I.) id est ut 100 ad 101: Conjungantur
jam hæ tres rationes, 126-2/15 ad 125-2/15, 125½ ad 126 & 100 ad 101 & fiet
gravitas in loco Q in Terram ad gravitatem in loco A in Terram, ut 126 ×
126 × 100 ad 125 × 125½ × 101, seu ut 501 ad 500.

Jam cum per Corol. 3. Prop. XCI. Lib. I. gravitas in canalis crure utrovis
ACca vel QCcq sit ut distantia locorum à centro Terræ; si crura illa
superficiebus transversis & æquidistantibus distinguantur in partes totis
proportionales, erunt pondera partium singularum in crure ACca ad pondera
partium totidem in crure altero, ut magnitudines & gravitates
acceleratrices conjunctim; id est ut 101 ad 100 & 500 ad 501, hoc est ut
505 ad 501. Ac proinde si vis centrifuga partis cujusque in crure ACca ex
motu diurno oriunda, fuisset ad pondus partis ejusdem ut 4 ad 505, eò ut de
pondere partis cujusque, in partes 505 diviso, partes quatuor detraheret;
manerent pondera in utroque crure æqualia, & propterea fluidum consisteret
in æquilibrio. Verum vis centrifuga partis cujusque est ad pondus ejusdem
ut 1 ad 290. Hoc est, vis centripeta quæ deberet esse ponderis pars 4/505
est tantum pars 1/290, & propterea dico, secundum Regulam auream, quod si
vis centrifuga 4/505 faciat ut altitudo aquæ in crure ACca superet
altitudin aquæ in crure QCcq parte centesima totius altitudinis: vis
centrifuga 1/290 faciet ut excessus altitudinis in crure ACca sit
altitudinis in crure altero QCcq pars tantum 3/689. Est igitur diameter
Terræ secundum æquatorem ad ipsius diametrum per polos ut 692 ad 689.
Ideoque cùm Terræ semidiameter mediocris, juxta nuperam Gallorum mensuram,
sit pedum Parisiensium 19615800 seu milliarium 3923 (posito quod milliare
sit mensura pedum 5000;) Terra altior erit ad æquatorem quàm ad polos,
excessu pedum 85200 seu milliarium 17.

Si Planeta vel major sit vel densior, minorve aut rarior quàm Terra,
manente tempore periodico revolutionis diurnæ, manebit proportio vis
centrifugæ ad gravitatem, & propterea manebit etiam proportio diametri
inter polos ad diametrum secundum æquatorem. At si motus diurnus in ratione
quacunque acceleretur vel retardetur, augebitur vel minuetur vis centrifuga
in duplicata illa ratione, & propterea differentia diametrorum augebitur in
eadem duplicata ratione. Unde cum Terra respectu fixarum revolvatur horis
23, 56' _Jupiter_ autem horis 9, 56', sintque temporum quadrata ut 29 ad 5,
differentia diametrorum _Jovis_ erit ad ipsius diametrum minorem ut {29 ×
3} ÷ {5 × 689} ad 1, seu 1 ad 39-3/5. Est igitur diameter _Jovis_ ab
oriente in occidentem ducta, ad ipsius diametrum inter polos ut 40-3/5 ad
39-3/5 quam proximè. Hæc ita se habent ex Hypothesi quod uniformis sit
Planetarum materia. Nam si materia densior sit ad centrum quàm ad
circumferentiam, diameter, quæ ab oriente in occidentem ducitur, erit adhuc
major.

Prop. XX. Prob. III.

    _Invenire & inter se comparare pondera corporum in regionibus
    diversis._

Quoniam pondera inæqualium crurum canalis aqueæ ACQqca æqualia sunt; &
pondera partium, cruribus totis proportionalium & similiter in totis
sitarum, sunt ad invicem ut pondera totorum, adeoque etiam æquantur inter
se; erunt pondera æqualium & in cruribus similiter sitarum partium
reciprocè ut crura, id est reciprocè ut 692 ad 689. Et par est ratio
homogeneorum & æqualium quorumvis & in canalis cruribus similiter sitorum
corporum. Horum pondera sunt reciprocè ut crura, id est reciprocè ut
distantiæ corporum à centro Terræ. Proinde si corpora in supremis canalium
partibus, sive in superficie Terræ consistant; erunt pondera eorum ad
invicem reciprocè ut distantiæ eorum à centro. Et eodem argumento pondera,
in aliis quibuscunque per totam Terræ superficiem regionibus, sunt
reciprocè ut distantiæ locorum à centro; & propterea, ex Hypothesi quod
Terra Sphærois sit, dantur proportione.

Unde tale confit Theorema, quod incrementum ponderis, pergendo ab Æquatore
ad Polos, sit quam proximè ut Sinus versus latitudinis duplicatæ, vel quod
perinde est ut quadratum Sinus recti Latitudinis. Exempli gratia, Latitudo
_Lutetiæ Parisiorum_ est 48 gr. 45': Ea Insulæ _Goree_ prope _Cape Verde_
14 gr. 15': ea _Cayennæ_ ad littus _Guianæ_ quasi 5 gr. ea locorum sub Polo
90 gr. Duplorum 97½ gr. 28½ gr. 10 gr. & 180 gr. Sinus versi sunt 11305,
1211, 152, & 20000. Proinde cum gravitas in Polo sit ad gravitatem sub
Æquatore ut 692 ad 689, & excessus ille gravitatis sub Polo ad gravitatem
sub Æquatore ut 3 ad 689; erit excessus gravitatis _Lutetiæ_, in Insula
_Goree_ & _Cayennæ_, ad gravitatem sub æquatore ut {3 × 11305} ÷ 20000, {3
× 1211} ÷ 20000 & {3 × 152} ÷ 20000 ad 689, seu 33915, 3633, & 456 ad
13780000, & propterea gravitates totæ in his locis erunt ad invicem ut
13813915, 13783633, 13780456, & 13780000. Quare cum longitudines Pendulorum
æqualibus temporibus oscillantium sint ut gravitates, & _Lutetiæ
Parisiorum_ longitudo penduli singulis minutis secundis oscillantis sit
pedum trium Parisiensium & 17/24 partium digiti; longitudines Pendulorum in
Insulâ _Goree_, in illâ _Cayennæ_ & sub Æquatore, minutis singulis secundis
oscillantium superabuntur à longitudine Penduli Parisiensis excessibus
81/1000, 89/1000 & 90/1000 partium digiti. Hæc omnia ita se habebunt, ex
Hypothesi quod Terra ex uniformi materia constat. Nam si materia ad centrum
paulò densior sit quàm ad superficiem, excessus illi erunt paulò majores;
propterea quod, si materia ad centrum redundans, qua densitas ibi major
redditur, subducatur & seorsim spectetur, gravitas in Terram reliquam
uniformiter densam erit reciprocè ut distantia ponderis à centro; in
materiam verò redundantem reciprocè ut quadratum distantiæ à materia illa
quam proximè. Gravitas igitur sub æquatore minor erit in materiam illam
redundantem quàm pro computo superiore, & propterea Terra ibi propter
defectum gravitatis paulò altius ascendet quàm in præcedentibus definitum
est. Jam verò Galli factis experimentis invenerunt quod Pendulorum minutis
singulis secundis oscillantium longitudo _Parisiis_ major sit quàm in
Insula _Goree_, parte decima digiti, & major quàm _Cayennæ_ parte octava.
Paulò majores sunt hæ differentiæ quam differentiæ 81/1000 & 89/1000 quæ
per computationem superiorem prodiere: & propterea (si crassis hisce
Observationibus satìs confidendum sit) Terra aliquanto altior erit sub
æquatore quàm pro superiore calculo, & densior ad centrum quàm in fodinis
prope superficiem. Si excessus gravitatis in locis hisce Borealibus supra
gravitatem ad æquatorem, experimentis majori cum diligentia institutis,
accuratè tandem determinetur, deinde excessus ejus ubique sumatur in
ratione Sinus versi latitudinis duplicatæ; determinabitur tum Mensura
Universalis, tum Æquatio temporis per æqualia pendula in locis diversis
indicati, tum etiam proportio diametrorum Terræ ac densitas ejus ad
centrum; ex Hypothesi quod densitas illa, pergendo ad circumferentiam,
uniformiter decrescat. Quæ quidem Hypothesis, licet accurata non sit, ad
ineundum tamen calculum assumi potest.

Prop. XXI. Theor. XVIII.

    _Puncta Æquinoctialia regredi, & axem Terræ singulis revolutionibus
    nutando bis inclinari in Eclipticam & bis redire ad positionem
    priorem._

Patet per Corol. 20. Prop. LXVI. Lib. I. Motus tamen iste nutandi
perexiguus esse debet, & vix aut ne vix quidem sensibilis.

Prop. XXII. Theor. XIX.

    _Motus omnes Lunares, omnesque motuum inæqualitates ex allatis
    Principiis consequi._

Planetas majores, interea dum circa Solem feruntur, posse alios minores
circum se revolventes Planetas deferre, & minores illos in Ellipsibus,
umbilicos in centris majorum habentibus, revolvi debere patet per Prop.
LXV. Lib. I. Actione autem Solis perturbabuntur eorum motus multimode,
iisque adficientur inæqualitatibus quæ in Luna nostra notantur. Hæc utique
(per Corol. 2, 3, 4, & 5 Prop. LXVI.) velocius movetur, ac radio ad Terram
ducto describit aream pro tempore majorem, orbemque habet minus curvam,
atque adeò propius accedit ad Terram, in Syzygiis quàm in Quadraturis, nisi
quatenus impedit motus Excentricitatis. Excentricitas enim maxima est (per
Corol. 9. Prop. LXVI.) ubi Apogæum Lunæ in Syzygiis versatur, & minima ubi
idem in Quadraturis consistit; & inde Luna in Perigæo velocior est & nobis
propior, in Apogæo autem tardior & remotior in Syzygiis quàm in
Quadraturis. Progreditur insuper Apogæum, & regrediuntur Nodi, sed motu
inæquabili. Et Apogæum quidem (per Corol. 7 & 8 Prop. LXVI.) velocius
progreditur in Syzygiis suis, tardius regreditur in Quadraturis, & excessu
progressus supra regressum annuatim fertur in consequentia. Nodi autem (per
Corol. 11. Prop. LXVI.) quiescunt in Syzygiis suis, & velocissimè
regrediuntur in Quadraturis. Sed & major est Lunæ latitudo maxima in ipsius
Quadraturis (per Corol. 10. Prop. LXVI.) quàm in Syzygiis: & motus medius
velocior in Perihelio Terræ (per Corol. 6. Prop. LXVI.) quàm in ipsius
Aphelio. Atque hæ sunt inæqualitates insigniores ab Astronomis notatæ.

Sunt etiam aliæ quædam nondum observatæ inæqualitates, quibus motus Lunares
adeò perturbantur, ut nulla hactenus lege ad Regulam aliquam certam reduci
potuerint. Velocitates enim seu motus horarii Apogæi & Nodorum Lunæ, &
eorundem æquationes, ut & differentia inter excentricitatem maximam in
Syzygiis & minimam in Quadraturis, & inæqualitas quæ Variatio dicitur,
augentur ac diminuuntur annuatim (per Corol. 14. Prop. LXVI.) in triplicata
ratione diametri apparentis Solaris. Et Variatio præterea augetur vel
diminuitur in duplicata ratione temporis inter quadraturas quam proximè
(per Corol. 1 & 2. Lem. X. & Corol. 16. Prop. LXVI. Lib. I.) Sed hæc
inæqualitas in calculo Astronomico, ad Prostaphæresin Lunæ referri solet, &
cum ea confundi.

Prop. XXIII. Prob. IV.

    _Motus inæquales Satellitum Jovis & Saturni à motibus Lunaribus
    derivare._

Ex motibus Lunæ nostræ motus analogi Lunarum seu Satellitum Jovis sic
derivantur. Motus medius Nodorum Satellitis extimi Jovialis est ad motum
medium Nodorum Lunæ nostræ, in ratione composita ex ratione duplicata
temporis periodici Terræ circa Solem ad tempus periodicum Jovis circa
Solem, & ratione simplici temporis periodici Satellitis circa Jovem ad
tempus periodicum Jovis circa Solem, & ratione simplici temporis periodici
Satellitis circa Jovem ad tempus periodicum Lunæ circa Terram: (per Corol.
16. Prop. LXVI.) adeoque annis centum conficit Nodus iste 9 gr. 34'. in
antecedentia. Motus medii Nodorum Satellitum interiorum sunt ad motum
hujus, ut illorum tempora periodica ad tempus periodicum hujus, per idem
Corollarium, & inde dantur. Motus autem Augis Satellitis cujusque in
consequentia est ad motum Nodorum ipsius in antecedentia ut motus Apogæi
Lunæ nostræ ad hujus motum Nodorum (per idem Corol.) & inde datur. Diminui
tamen debet motus Augis sic inventus in ratione 5 ad 9 vel 1 ad 2 circiter,
ob causam quam hic exponere non vacat. Æquationes maximæ Nodorum & Augis
Satellitis cujusque fere sunt ad æquationes maximas Nodorum & Augis Lunæ
respectivè, ut motus Nodorum & Augis Satellitum, tempore unius revolutionis
æquationum priorum, ad motus Nodorum & Apogæi Lunæ tempore unius
revolutionis æquationum posteriorum. Variatio Satellitis è Jove spectati,
est ad Variationem Lunæ ut sunt toti motus Nodorum temporibus periodicis
Satellitis & Lunæ ad invicem, per idem Corollarium, adeoque in Satellite
extimo non superat 6". 22"'. Parvitate harum inæqualitatum & tarditate
motuum fit ut motus Satellitum summè regulares reperiantur, utque Astronomi
recentiores aut motum omnem Nodis denegent, aut asserant tardissimè
retrogradum. Nam _Flamstedius_ collatis suis cum _Cassini_ Observationibus
Nodos tarde regredi deprehendit.

Prop. XXIV. Theor. XX.

    _Fluxum & refluxum Maris ab actionibus Solis ac Lunæ oriri debere._

Mare singulis diebus tam Lunaribus quàm Solaribus bis intumescere debere ac
bis defluere patet per Corol. 19. Prop. LXVI. Lib. I. ut & aquæ maximam
altitudinem, in maribus profundis & liberis, appulsum Luminarium ad
Meridianum loci minori quàm sex horarum spatio sequi, uti fit in Maris
_Atlantici_ & _Æthiopici_ tractu toto orientali inter _Galliam_ &
Promontorium _Bonæ Spei_, ut & in Maris _Pacifici_ littore _Chilensi_ &
_Peruviano_: in quibus omnibus littoribus æstus in horam circiter tertiam
incidit, nisi ubi motus per loca vadosa propagatus aliquantulum retardatur.
Horas numero ab appulsu Luminaris utriusque ad Meridianum loci, tam infra
Horizontem quàm supra, & per horas diei Lunaris intelligo vigesimas quartas
partes temporis quo Luna motu apparente diurno ad Meridianum loci
revolvitur.

Motus autem bini, quos Luminaria duo excitant, non cernentur distinctè, sed
motum quendam mixtum efficient. In Luminarium Conjunctione vel Oppositione
conjugentur eorum effectus, & componetur fluxus & refluxus maximus. In
Quadraturis Sol attollet aquam ubi Luna deprimit, deprimetque ubi Sol
attollit; & ex effectuum differentia æstus omnium minimus orietur. Et
quoniam, experientia teste, major est effectus Lunæ quàm Solis, incidet
aquæ maxima altitudo in horam tertiam Lunarem. Extra Syzygias &
Quadraturas, æstus maximus qui sola vi Lunari incidere semper deberet in
horam tertiam Lunarem, & sola Solari in tertiam Solarem, compositis viribus
incidet in tempus aliquod intermedium quod tertiæ Lunari propinquius est;
adeoque in transitu Lunæ à Syzygiis ad Quadraturas, ubi hora tertia Solaris
præcedit tertiam Lunarem, maxima aquæ altitudo præcedet etiam tertiam
Lunarem, idque maximo intervallo paulo post Octantes Lunæ; & paribus
intervallis æstus maximus sequetur horam tertiam Lunarem in transitu Lunæ à
Quadraturis ad Syzygias. Hæc ita sunt in mari aperto. Nam in ostiis
Fluviorum fluxus majores cæteris paribus tardius ad [Greek: akmên] venient.

Pendent autem effectus Luminarium ex eorum distantiis à Terra. In minoribus
enim distantiis majores sunt eorum effectus, in majoribus minores, idque in
triplicata ratione diametrorum apparentium. Igitur Sol tempore hyberno, in
Perigæo existens, majores edit effectus, efficitque ut æstus in Syzygiis
paulo majores sint, & in Quadraturis paulo minores (cæteris paribus) quàm
tempore æstivo; & Luna in Perigæo singulis mensibus majores ciet æstus quàm
ante vel post dies quindecim, ubi in Apogæo versatur. Unde fit ut æstus duo
omnino maximi in Syzygiis continuis se mutuo non sequantur.

Pendet etiam effectus utriusque Luminaris ex ipsius Declinatione seu
distantia ab Æquatore. Nam si Luminare in polo constitueretur, traheret
illud singulas aquæ partes constanter, absque actionis intensione &
remissione, adeoque nullam motus reciprocationem cieret. Igitur Luminaria
recedendo ab æquatore polum versus effectus suos gradatim amittent, &
propterea minores ciebunt æstus in Syzygiis Solstitialibus quàm in
Æquinoctialibus. In Quadraturis autem Solstitialibus majores ciebunt æstus
quàm in Quadraturis Æquinoctialibus; eò quod Lunæ jam in æquatore
constitutæ effectus maxime superat effectum Solis. Incidunt igitur æstus
maximi in Syzygias & minimi in Quadraturas Luminarium, circa tempora
Æquinoctii utriusque. Et æstum maximum in Syzygiis comitatur semper minimus
in Quadraturis, ut experientiâ compertum est. Per minorem autem distantiam
Solis à Terra, tempore hyberno quàm tempore æstivo, fit ut æstus maximi &
minimi sæpius præcedant Æquinoctium vernum quàm sequantur, & sæpius
sequantur autumnale quàm præcedant.

[Illustration]

Pendent etiam effectus Luminarium ex locorum latitudine. Designet ApEP
Tellurem aquis profundis undique coopertam; C centrum ejus; Pp, polos; AE
Æquatorem; F locum quemvis extra Æquatorem; Ff parallelum loci; Dd
parallelum ei respondentem ex altera parte æquatoris; L locum quem Luna
tribus ante horis occupabat; H locum Telluris ei perpendiculariter
subjectum; h locum huic oppositum; K, k loca inde gradibus 90 distantia,
CH, Ch Maris altitudines maximas mensuratas à centro Telluris; & CK, Ck
altitudines minimas; & si axibus Hh, Kk describatur Ellipsis, deinde
Ellipseos hujus revolutione circa axem majorem Hh describatur Sphærois
HPKhpk; designabit hæc figuram Maris quam proximè, & erunt CF, Cf, CD, Cd
altitudines Maris in locis F, f, D, d. Quinetiam si in præfata Ellipseos
revolutione punctum quodvis N describat circulum NM, secantem parallelos
Ff, Dd in locis quibusvis R, T, & æquatorem AE in S; erit CN altitudo Maris
in locis omnibus R, S, T, sitis in hoc circulo. Hinc in revolutione diurna
loci cujusvis F, affluxus erit maximus in F, hora tertia post appulsum Lunæ
ad Meridianum supra Horizontem; postea defluxus maximus in Q hora tertia
post occasum Lunæ; dein affluxus maximus in f hora tertia post appulsum
Lunæ ad Meridianum infra Horizontem; ultimò defluxus maximus in Q hora
tertia post ortum Lunæ; & affluxus posterior in f erit minor quàm affluxus
prior in F. Distinguitur enim Mare totum in duos omnino fluctus
Hemisphæricos, unum in Hemisphærio KHkC ad Boream vergentem, alterum in
Hemisphærio opposito KhkC; quos igitur fluctum Borealem & fluctum Australem
nominare licet. Hi fluctus semper sibi mutuò oppositi veniunt per vices ad
Meridianos locorum singulorum, interposito intervallo horarum Lunarium
duodecim. Cumque regiones Boreales magis participant fluctum Borealem, &
Australes magis Australem, inde oriuntur æstus alternis vicibus majores &
minores, in locis singulis extra æquatorem. Æstus autem major, Lunâ in
verticem loci declinante, incidet in horam circiter tertiam post appulsum
Lunæ ad Meridianum supra Horizontem, & Lunâ declinationem mutante vertetur
in minorem. Et fluxuum differentia maxima incidet in tempora Solstitiorum;
præsertim si Lunæ Nodus ascendens versatur in principio Arietis. Sic
experientiâ compertum est, quod æstus matutini tempore hyberno superent
vespertinos & vespertini tempore æstivo matutinos, ad _Plymuthum_ quidem
altitudine quasi pedis unius, ad _Bristoliam_ verò altitudine quindecim
digitorum: Observantibus _Colepressio_ & _Sturmio_.

Motus autem hactenus descripti mutantur aliquantulum per vim illam
reciprocationis aquarum, qua Maris æstus, etiam cessantibus Luminarium
actionibus, posset aliquamdiu perseverare. Conservatio hæcce motus impressi
minuit differentiam æstuum alternorum; & æstus proximè post Syzygias
majores reddit, eosque proximè post Quadraturas minuit. Unde fit ut æstus
alterni ad _Plymuthum_ & _Bristoliam_ non multo magis differant ab invicem
quàm altitudine pedis unius vel digitorum quindecim; utque æstus omnium
maximi in iisdem portubus non sint primi à Syzygiis sed tertii. Retardantur
etiam motus omnes in transitu per vada, adeò ut æstus omnium maximi, in
fretis quibusdam & Fluviorum ostiis, sint quarti vel etiam quinti à
Syzygiis.

Porrò fieri potest ut æstus propagetur ab Oceano per freta diversa ad
eundem portum, & citius transeat per aliqua freta quàm per alia, quo in
casu æstus idem, in duos vel plures successive advenientes divisus,
componere possit motus novos diversorum generum. Fingamus æstus duos
æquales à diversis locis in eundem portum venire, quorum prior præcedat
alterum spatio horarum sex, incidatque in horam tertiam ab appulsu Lunæ ad
Meridianum portus. Si Luna in hocce suo ad Meridianum appulsu versabatur in
æquatore, venient singulis horis senis æquales affluxus, qui in mutuos
refluxus incidendo eosdem affluxibus æquabunt, & sic spatio diei illius
efficient ut aqua tranquillè stagnet. Si Luna tunc declinabat ab Æquatore,
fient æstus in Oceano vicibus alternis majores & minores, uti dictum est; &
inde propagabuntur in hunc portum affluxus bini majores & bini minores,
vicibus alternis. Affluxus autem bini majores component aquam altissimam in
medio inter utrumque, affluxus major & minor faciet ut aqua ascendat ad
mediocrem altitudinem in Medio ipsorum, & inter affluxus binos minores aqua
ascendet ad altitudinem minimam. Sic spatio viginti quatuor horarum, aqua
non bis ut fieri solet, sed semel tantum perveniet ad maximam altitudinem &
semel ad minimam; & altitudo maxima, si Luna declinat in polum supra
Horizontem loci, incidet in horam vel sextam vel tricesimam ab appulsu Lunæ
ad Meridianum, atque Lunâ declinationem mutante mutabitur in defluxum.
Quorum omnium exemplum, in portu regni _Tunquini_ ad _Batsham_, sub
latitudine Boreali 20 gr. 50 min. _Halleius_ ex Nautarum Observationibus
patefecit. Ibi aqua die transitum Lunæ per Æquatorem sequente stagnat, dein
Lunâ ad Boream declinante incipit fluere & refluere, non bis, ut in aliis
portubus, sed semel singulis diebus; & æstus incidit in occasum Lunæ,
defluxus maximus in ortum. Cum Lunæ declinatione augetur hic æstus, usque
ad diem septimum vel octavum, dein per alios septem dies iisdem gradibus
decrescit, quibus antea creverat; & Lunâ declinationem mutante cessat, ac
mox mutatur in defluxum. Incidit enim subinde defluxus in occasum Lunæ &
affluxus in ortum, donec Luna iterum mutet declinationem. Aditus ad hunc
portum fretaque vicina duplex patet, alter ab Oceano _Sinensi_ inter
Continentem & Insulam _Luconiam_, alter à Mari _Indico_ inter Continentem &
Insulam _Borneo_. An æstus spatio horarum duodecim à Mari _Indico_, &
spatio horarum sex à Mari _Sinensi_ per freta illa venientes, & sic in
horam tertiam & nonam Lunarem incidentes, componant hujusmodi motus; sitne
alia Marium illorum conditio, observationibus vicinorum littorum
determinandum relinquo.

Hactenus causas motuum Lunæ & Marium reddidi. De quantitate motuum jam
convenit aliqua subjungere.

Prop. XXV. Prob. V.

    _Invenire vires Solis ad perturbandos motus Lunæ._

[Illustration]

Designet Q Solem, S Terram, P Lunam, PADB orbem Lunæ. In QP capiatur QK
æqualis QS; sitque QL ad QK in duplicata ratione QK ad QP & ipsi PS agatur
parallela LM; & si gravitas acceleratrix Terræ in Solem exponatur per
distantiam QS vel QK, erit QL gravitas acceleratrix Lunæ in Solem. Ea
componitur ex partibus QM, LM, quarum LM & ipsius QM pars SM perturbat
motum Lunæ, ut in Libri primi Prop. LXVI. & ejus Corollariis expositum est.
Quatenus Terra & Luna circum commune gravitatis centrum revolvuntur,
perturbabitur motus Terræ circa centrum illud à viribus consimilibus; sed
summas tam virium quàm motuum referre licet ad Lunam, & summas virium per
lineas ipsis analogas SM & ML designare. Vis ML (in mediocri sua
quantitate) est ad vim gravitatis, qua Luna in orbe suo circa Terram
quiescentem ad distantiam PS revolvi posset, in duplicata ratione temporum
periodicorum Lunæ circa Terram & Terræ circa Solem, (per Corol. 17. Prop.
LXVI. Lib. I.) hoc est in duplicata ratione dierum 27. hor. 7. min. 43. ad
dies 365. hor. 6. min. 9. id est ut 1000 ad 178725, seu 1 ad 178-8/11. Vis
qua Luna in orbe suo circa Terram quiescentem, ad distantiam PS
semidiametrorum terrestrium 60½ revolvi posset, est ad vim, qua eodem
tempore ad distantiam semidiametrorum 60 revolvi posset, ut 60½ ad 60; &
hæc vis ad vim gravitatis apud nos ut 1 ad 60 × 60. Ideoque vis mediocris
ML est ad vim gravitatis in superficie Terræ, ut 1 × 60½ ad 60 × 60 × 60 ×
178-8/11 seu 1 ad 638092,6. Unde ex proportione linearum SM, ML datur etiam
vis SM: & hæ sunt vires Solis quibus motus Lunæ perturbantur.   _Q. E. I._

Prop. XXVI. Prob. VI.

    _Invenire incrementum areæ quam Luna radio ad Terram ducto describit._

[Illustration]

Diximus aream, quam Luna radio ad Terram ducto describit, esse tempori
proportionalem, nisi quatenus motus Lunaris ab actione Solis turbatur.
Inæqualitatem momenti (vel incrementi horarii) hic investigandam
proponimus. Ut computatio facilior reddatur, fingamus orbem Lunæ circularem
esse, & inæqualitates omnes negligamus, ea sola excepta, de qua hic agitur.
Ob ingentem verò Solis distantiam ponamus etiam lineas QP, QS sibi invicem
parallelas esse. Hoc pacto vis LM reducetur semper ad mediocrem suam
quantitatem SP, ut & vis SM ad mediocrem suam quantitatem 3PK. Hæ vires,
per Legum Corol. 2. componunt vim SL; & hæc vis, si in radium SP demittatur
perpendiculum LE, resolvitur in vires SE, EL, quarum SE, agendo semper
secundum radium SP, nec accelerat nec retardat descriptionem areæ QSP radio
illo SP factam; & EL agendo secundum perpendiculum, accelerat vel retardat
ipsam, quantum accelerat vel retardat Lunam. Acceleratio illa Lunæ, in
transitu ipsius à Quadratura C ad conjunctionem A, singulis temporis
momentis facta, est ut ipsa vis accelerans EL, hoc est ut 3PK × SK ÷ SP.
Exponatur tempus per motum medium Lunarem, vel (quod eodem fere recidit)
per angulum CSP, vel etiam per arcum CP. Ad CS erigatur Normalis CG ipsi CS
æqualis. Et diviso arcu quadrantali AC in particulas innumeras æquales Pp
&c. per quas æquales totidem particulæ temporis exponi possint, ductâque pk
perpendiculari ad CS, jungatur SG ipsis KP, kp productis occurrens in F &
f; & erit Kk ad PK ut Pp ad Sp, hoc est in data ratione, adeoque FK × Kk
seu area FKkf ut 3PK × SK ÷ SP id est ut EL; & compositè, area tota GCKF ut
summa omnium virium EL tempore toto CP impressarum in Lunam, atque adeò
etiam ut velocitas hac summâ genita, id est, ut acceleratio descriptionis
areæ CSP, seu incrementum momenti. Vis qua Luna circa Terram quiescentem ad
distantiam SP, tempore suo periodico CADBC dierum 27. hor. 7. min. 43.
revolvi posset, efficeret ut corpus, tempore CS cadendo, describeret
longitudinem ½CS, & velocitatem simul acquireret æqualem velocitati, qua
Luna in orbe suo movetur. Patet hoc per Schol. Prop. IV. Lib. I. Cum autem
perpendiculum Kd in SP demissum sit ipsius EL pars tertia, & ipsius SP seu
ML in octantibus pars dimidia, vis EL in Octantibus, ubi maxima est,
superabit vim ML in ratione 3 ad 2, adeoque erit ad vim illam, qua Luna
tempore suo periodico circa Terram quiescentem revolvi posset, ut 100 ad
2/3 × 17872½ seu 11915, & tempore CS velocitatem generare deberet quæ esset
pars 100/11915 velocitatis Lunaris, tempore autem CPA velocitatem majorem
generaret in ratione CA ad CS seu SP. Exponatur vis maxima EL in Octantibus
per aream FK × Kk rectangulo ½SP × Pp æqualem. Et velocitas, quam vis
maxima tempore quovis CP generare posset, erit ad velocitatem quam vis
omnis minor EL eodem tempore generat ut rectangulum ½SP × CP ad aream KCGF:
tempore autem toto CPA, velocitates genitæ erunt ad invicem ut rectangulum
½SP × CA & triangulum SCG, sive ut arcus quadrantalis CA ad radium SP.
Ideoque (per Prop. IX. Lib. V. Elem.) velocitatis posterior, toto tempore
genita, erit pars 100/11915 velocitatis Lunæ. Huic Lunæ velocitati, quæ
areæ momento mediocri analoga est, addatur & auferatur dimidium velocitatis
alterius; & si momentum mediocre exponatur per numerum 11915 summa 11915 +
50 seu 11965 exhibebit momentum maximum areæ in Syzygia A, ac differentia
11915 - 50 seu 11865 ejusdem momentum minimum in Quadraturis. Igitur areæ
temporibus æqualibus in Syzygiis & Quadraturis descriptæ, sunt ad invicem
ut 11965 ad 11865. Ad momentum minimum 11865 addatur momentum, quod sit ad
momentorum differentiam 100 ut trapezium FKCG ad triangulum SCG (vel quod
perinde est, ut quadratum Sinus PK ad quadratum Radii SP, id est ut Pd ad
SP) & summa exhibebit momentum areæ, ubi Luna est in loco quovis intermedio
P.

Hæc omnia ita se habent, ex Hypothesi quod Sol & Terra quiescunt, & Luna
tempore Synodico dierum 27. hor. 7. min. 43. revolvitur. Cum autem periodus
Synodica Lunaris verè sit dierum 29. hor. 12. & min. 44. augeri debent
momentorum incrementa in ratione temporis. Hoc pacto incrementum totum,
quod erat pars 100/11915 momenti mediocris, jam fiet ejusdem pars
100/11023. Ideoque momentum areæ in Quadratura Lunæ erit ad ejus momentum
in Syzygia ut 11023 - 50 ad 11023 + 50, seu 10973 ad 11073, & ad ejus
momentum, ubi Luna in alio quovis loco intermedio P versatur, ut 10973 ad
10973 + Pd, existente videlicet SP æquali 100.

Area igitur, quam Luna radio ad Terram ducto singulis temporis particulis
æqualibus describit, est quam proximè ut summa numeri 219-46/100 & Sinus
versi duplicatæ distantiæ Lunæ à Quadratura proxima, in circulo cujus
radius est unitas. Hæc ita se habent ubi Variatio in Octantibus est
magnitudinis mediocris. Sin Variatio ibi major sit vel minor, augeri debet
vel minui Sinus ille versus in eadem ratione.

Prop. XXVII. Prob. VII.

    _Ex motu horario Lunæ invenire ipsius distantiam à Terra._

Area, quam Luna radio ad Terram ducto, singulis temporis momentis,
describit, est ut motus horarius Lunæ & quadratum distantiæ Lunæ à Terrâ
conjunctim; & propterea distantia Lunæ à Terrâ est in ratione compositâ ex
dimidiatâ ratione Areæ directè & dimidiatâ ratione motus horarii inversè.
_Q. E. I._

_Corol. 1._ Hinc datur Lunæ diameter apparens: quippe quæ sit reciprocè ut
ipsius distantia à Terra. Tentent Astronomi quàm probè hæc Regula cum
Phænomenis congruat.

_Corol. 2._ Hinc etiam Orbis Lunaris accuratiùs ex Phænomenis quàm antehac
definiri potest.

Prop. XXVIII. Prob. VIII.

    _Invenire diametros Orbis in quo Luna absque excentricitate moveri
    deberet._

[Illustration]

Curvatura Trajectoriæ, quam mobile, si secundum Trajectoriæ illius
perpendiculum trahatur, describit, est ut attractio directè & quadratum
velocitatis inversè. Curvaturas linearum pono esse inter se in ultima
proportione Sinuum vel Tangentium angulorum contactuum ad radios æquales
pertinentium, ubi radii illi in infinitum diminuuntur. Attractio autem Lunæ
in Terram in Syzygiis est excessus gravitatis ipsius in Terram supra vim
Solarem 2PK (Vide _Figur. pag. 434._) qua gravitas acceleratrix Lunæ in
Solem superat gravitatem acceleratricem Terræ in Solem. In Quadraturis
autem attractio illa est summa gravitatis Lunæ in Terram & vis Solaris KS,
qua Luna in Terram trahitur. Et hæ attractiones, si {AS + CS} ÷ 2 dicatur
N, sunt ut 178725 ÷ ASq. - 2000 ÷ {CS × N} & 178725 ÷ CSq. + 1000 ÷ {AS ×
N} quam proxime; seu ut 178725N in CSq. - 2000ASq. in CS, & 178725N in ASq.
+ 1000 CSq. × AS. Nam se gravitas acceleratrix Terræ in Solem exponatur per
numerum 178725, vis mediocris ML, quæ in Quadraturis est PS vel SK & Lunam
trahit in Terram, erit 1000, & vis mediocris SM in Syzygiis erit 3000; de
qua, si vis mediocris ML subducatur, manebit vis 2000 qua Luna in Syzygiis
distrahitur à Terra, quamque jam ante nominavi 2PK. Velocitas autem Lunæ in
Syzygiis A & B est ad ipsius velocitatem in Quadraturis C & D ut CS, ad AS
& momentum areæ quam Luna radio ad Terram ducto describit in Syzygiis ad
momentum ejusdem areæ in Quadraturis conjunctim; id est ut 11073CS ad
10973AS. Sumatur hæc ratio bis inversè & ratio prior semel directè, & fiet
Curvatura Orbis Lunaris in Syzygiis ad ejusdem Curvaturam in Quadraturis ut
120407 × 178725ASq. × CSq. × N - 120407 × 2000AS qq. × CS ad 122611 ×
178725ASq. × CSq. × N + 122611 × 1000CS qq. × AS, id est ut 2151969AS × CS
× N - 24081AS cub. ad 2191371AS × CS × N + 12261CS cub.

Quoniam figura orbis Lunaris ignoratur, hujus vice assumamus Ellipsin DBCA,
in cujus centro S Terra collocetur, & cujus axis major DC Quadraturis,
minor AB Syzygiis interjaceat. Cum autem planum Ellipseos hujus motu
angulari circa Terram revolvatur, & Trajectoria, cujus Curvaturam
consideramus, describi debet in plano quod motu omni angulari omnino
destituitur: consideranda erit figura, quam Luna in Ellipsi illa revolvendo
describit in hoc plano, hoc est Figura Cpa, cujus puncta singula p
inveniuntur capiendo punctum quodvis P in Ellipsi, quod locum Lunæ
representet, & ducendo Sp æqualem SP, ea lege ut angulus PSp æqualis sit
motui apparenti Solis à tempore Quadraturæ C confecto; vel (quod eodem fere
recidit) ut angulus CSp sit ad angulum CSP ut tempus revolutionis Synodicæ
Lunaris ad tempus revolutionis Periodicæ seu 29 d. 12. h. 44', ad 27 d. 7
h. 43'. Capiatur igitur angulus CSa in eadem ratione ad angulum rectum CSA,
& sit longitudo Sa æqualis longitudini SA; & erit a Apsis ima & C Apsis
summa orbis hujus Cpa. Rationes autem ineundo invenio quod differentia
inter curvaturam orbis Cpa in vertice a, & curvaturam circuli centro S
intervallo SA descripti, sit ad differentiam inter curvaturam Ellipseos in
vertice A & curvaturam ejusdem circuli, in duplicata ratione anguli CSP ad
angulum CSp; & quod curvatura Ellipseos in A sit ad curvaturam circuli
illius in duplicata ratione SA ad SC; & curvatura circuli illius ad
curvaturam circuli centro S intervallo SC descripti ut SC ad SA; hujus
autem curvatura ad curvaturam Ellipseos in C in duplicata ratione SA ad SC;
& differentia inter curvaturam Ellipseos in vertice C & curvaturam circuli
novissimi, ad differentiam inter curvaturam figuræ Spa in vertice C &
curvaturam ejusdem circuli, in duplicata ratione anguli CSP ad angulum CSp.
Quæ quidem rationes ex Sinubus angulorum contactus ac differentiarum
angulorum facilè colliguntur. Collatis autem his rationibus inter se,
prodit curvatura figuræ Cpa in a ad ipsius curvaturam in C, ut AS cub. +
16824/100000CSq. × AS ad CS cub. + 16824/100000ASq. × CS. Ubi numerus
16824/100000 designat differentiam quadratorum angulorum CSP & CSp
applicatam ad Quadratum anguli minoris CSP, seu (quod perinde est)
differentiam Quadratorum temporum 27 d. 7 h. 43', & 29 d. 12 h. 44',
applicatam ad Quadratum temporis 27 d. 7 h. 43'.

Igitur cum a designet Syzygiam Lunæ, & C ipsius Quadraturam, proportio jam
inventa eadem esse debet cum proportione curvaturæ Orbis Lunæ in Syzygiis
ad ejusdem curvaturam in Quadraturis, quam supra invenimus. Proinde ut
inveniatur proportio CS ad AS, duco extrema & media in se invicem. Et
termini prodeuntes ad AS × CS applicati, fiunt 2062,79CS qq. - 2151969N ×
CS cub. + 368682N × AS × CSq. + 36342ASq. × CSq. - 362046N × ASq. × CS +
2191371N × AS cub. + 4051,4AS qq. = 0. Hic pro terminorum AS & CS semisummâ
N scribo 1, & pro eorundem semidifferentia ponendo x, fit CS = 1 + x, & AS
= 1 - x: quibus in æquatione scriptis, & æquatione prodeunte resolutâ,
obtinetur x æqualis 0,0072036, & inde semidiameter CS fit 1,0072, &
semidiameter AS 0,9928, qui numeri sunt ut 69-11/12 & 68-11/12 quam
proximè. Est igitur distantia Lunæ à Terra in Syzygiis ad ipsius distantiam
in Quadraturis (seposita scilicet excentricitatis consideratione) ut
68-11/12 ad 69-11/12, vel numeris rotundis ut 69 ad 70.

Prop. XXIX. Prob. IX.

    _Invenire Variationem Lunæ._

[Illustration]

Oritur hæc inæqualitas partim ex forma Elliptica orbis Lunaris, partim ex
inæqualitate momentorum areæ, quam Luna radio ad Terram ducto describit. Si
Luna P in Ellipsi DBCA circa Terram in centro Ellipseos quiescentem
moveretur, & radio SP ad Terram ducto describeret aream CSP tempori
proportionalem; esset autem Ellipseos semidiameter maxima CS ad
semidiametrum minimam SA ut 69-11/12 ad 68-11/12: foret Tangens anguli CSP
ad Tangentem anguli motus medii à quadratura C computati, ut Ellipseos
semidiameter SA ad ejusdem semidiametrum SC seu 68-11/12 ad 69-11/12. Debet
autem descriptio areæ CSP, in progressu Lunæ à Quadratura ad Syzygiam, ea
ratione accelerari, ut ejus momentum in Syzygia Lunæ sit ad ejus momentum
in Quadratura ut 11073 ad 10973, utq; excessus momenti in loco quovis
intermedio P supra momentum in Quadratura sit ut quadratum Sinus anguli
CSP. Id quod satis accuratè fiet, si tangens anguli CSP diminuatur in
dimidiata ratione numeri 10973 ad numerum 11073, id est in ratione numeri
68-5958/10000 ad numerum 68-11/12. Quo pacto tangens anguli CSP jam erit ad
tangentem motus medii ut 68-5958/10000 ad 69-11/12, & angulus CSP in
Octantibus, ubi motus medius est 45 gr. invenietur 44 gr. 27'. 29": qui
subductus de angulo motus medii 45 gr. relinquit Variationem 32'. 31". Hæc
ita se haberent si Luna, pergendo à Quadratura ad Syzygiam, describeret
angulum CSA graduum tantum nonaginta. Verum ob motum Terræ, quo Sol in
antecedentia motu apparente transfertur, Luna, priusquam Solem assequitur,
describit angulum CSa angulo recto majorem in ratione revolutionis Lunaris
Synodicæ ad revolutionem periodicam, id est in ratione 29 d. 12 h. 44'. ad
27 d. 7 h. 43'. Et hoc pacto anguli omnes circa centrum S dilatantur in
eadem ratione, & Variatio quæ secus esset 32'. 31". jam aucta in eadem
ratione, fit 35'. 9". Hæc ab Astronomis constituitur 40', & ex
recentioribus Observationibus 38'. _Halleius_ autem recentissimè
deprehendit esse 38' in Octantibus versus oppositionem Solis, & 32' in
Octantibus Solem versus. Unde mediocris ejus magnitudo erit 35': quæ cum
magnitudine à nobis inventa 35'. 9" probe congruit. Magnitudinem enim
mediocrem computavimus, neglectis differentiis, quæ à curvaturâ Orbis
magni, majorique Solis actione in Lunam falcatam & novam quam in Gibbosam &
plenam, oriri possint.

Prop. XXX. Prob. X.

    _Invenire motum horarium Nodorum Lunæ in Orbe circulari._

[Illustration]

Designet S Solem, T Terram, P Lunam, NPn Orbem Lunæ, Npn vestigium Orbis in
plano Eclipticæ; N, n, Nodos, nTNm lineam Nodorum infinitè productam, PI,
PK; perpendicula demissa in lineas ST, Qq; Pp perpendiculum demissum in
planum Eclipticæ; Q, q Quadraturas Lunæ in plano Eclipticæ & pK
perpendiculum in lineam Qq Quadraturis intrajacentem. Et vis Solis ad
perturbandum motum Lunæ (per Prop. XXV.) duplex erit, altera lineæ 2IT vel
2Kp, altera lineæ PI proportionalis. Et Luna vi priore in Solem, posteriore
in lineam ST trahitur. Componitur autem vis posterior PI ex viribus IT &
PT, quarum PT agit secundum planum orbis Lunaris, & propterea situm plani
nil mutat. Hæc igitur negligenda est. Vis autem IT cum vi 2IT componit vim
totam 3IT, qua planum Orbis Lunaris perturbatur. Et hæc vis per Prop. XXV.
est ad vim qua Luna in circulo circa Terram quiescentem tempore suo
periodico revolvi posset, ut 3IT ad Radium circuli multiplicatum per
numerum 178,725, sive ut IT ad Radium multiplicatum per 59,575. Cæterum in
hoc calculo & eo omni qui sequitur, considero lineas omnes à Luna ad Solem
ductas tanquam parallelas lineæ quæ à Terra ad Solem ducitur, propterea
quod inclinatio tantum ferè minuit effectus omnes in aliquibus casibus,
quantum auget in aliis; & Nodorum motus mediocres quærimus, neglectis
istiusmodi minutiis, quæ calculum nimis impeditum redderent.

Designet jam PM arcum, quem Luna dato tempore quam minimo describit, & ML
lineolam quam Luna, impellente vi præfata 3IT, eodem tempore describere
posset. Jungantur PL, MP, & producantur eæ ad m & l, ubi secent planum
Eclipticæ; inque Tm demittatur perpendiculum PH. Et quoniam ML parallela
est ipsi ST, si ml parallela sit ipsi ML, erit ml in plano Eclipticæ, &
contra. Ergo ml, cum sit in plano Eclipticæ, parallela erit ipsi ML, &
similia erunt triangula LMP, Lmp. Jam cum MPm sit in plano Orbis, in quo
Luna in loco P movebatur, incidet punctum m in lineam Nn per Orbis illius
Nodos N, n, ductam. Et quoniam vis qua lineola LM generatur, si tota simul
& semel in loco P impressa esset, efficeret ut Luna moveretur in arcu,
cujus Chorda esset LP, atque adeò transferret Lunam de plano MPmT in planum
LPlT; motus Nodorum à vi illa genitus æqualis erit angulo mTl. Est autem ml
ad mP ut ML ad MP, adeoque cum MP ob datum tempus data sit, est ml ut
rectangulum ML × mP, id est ut rectangulum IT × mP. Et angulus mTl, si modo
angulus Tml rectus sit, est ut ml ÷ Tm, & propterea ut IT × Pm ÷ Tm id est
(ob proportionales Tm & mP, TP & PH) ut IT × PH ÷ TP, adeoque ob datam TP,
ut IT × PH. Quod si angulus Tml, seu STN obliquus sit, erit angulus mTl
adhuc minor, in ratione Sinus anguli STN ad Radium. Est igitur velocitas
Nodorum ut IT × PH & Sinus anguli STN conjunctim, sive ut contentum sub
sinubus trium angulorum TPI, PTN & STN.

Si anguli illi, Nodis in Quadraturis & Luna in Syzygia existentibus, recti
sint, lineola ml abibit in infinitum, & angulus mTl evadet angulo mPl
æqualis. Hoc autem in casu, angulus mPl est ad angulum PTM, quem Luna eodem
tempore motu suo apparente circa Terram describit ut 1 ad 59,575. Nam
angulus mPl æqualis est angulo LPM, id est angulo deflexionis Lunæ à recto
tramite, quam præfata vis Solaris 3IT dato illo tempore generare possit; &
angulus PTM æqualis est angulo deflexionis Lunæ à recto tramite, quem vis
illa, qua Luna in Orbe suo retinetur, eodem tempore generat. Et hæ vires,
uti supra diximus, sunt ad invicem ut 1 ad 59,575. Ergo cum motus medius
horarius Lunæ (respectu fixarum) sit 32'. 56". 27"'. 12^{iv}½, motus
horarius Nodi in hoc casu erit 33". 10"'. 33^{iv}. 12^v. Aliis autem in
casibus motus iste horarius erit ad 33". 10"'. 33^{iv}. 12^v. ut contentum
sub sinibus angulorum trium TPI, PTN, & STN (seu distantiarum Lunæ à
Quadratura, Lunæ à Nodo & Nodi à Sole) ad cubum Radii. Et quoties signum
anguli alicujus de affirmativo in negativum, deque negativo in affirmativum
mutatur, debebit motus regressivus in progressivum & progressivus in
regressivum mutari. Unde fit ut Nodi progrediantur quoties Luna inter
Quadraturam alterutram & Nodum Quadraturæ proximum versatur. Aliis in
casibus regrediuntur, & per excessum regressus supra progressum, singulis
mensibus feruntur in antecedentia.

[Illustration]

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si a dati arcus quam minimi PM terminis P & M ad lineam
Quadraturas jungentem Qq demittantur perpendicula PK, Mk, eademque
producantur donec secent lineam Nodorum Nn in D & d; erit motus horarius
Nodorum ut area MPDd & quadratum lineæ AZ conjunctim. Sunto enim PK, PH &
AZ prædicti tres Sinus. Nempe PK Sinus distantiæ Lunæ à Quadratura, PH
Sinus distantiæ Lunæ à Nodo, & AZ Sinus distantiæ Nodi à Sole: & erit
velocitas Nodi ut contentum PK × PH × AZ. Est autem PT ad PK ut PM ad Kk,
adeoque ob datas PT & PM est Kk ipsi PK proportionalis. Est & AT ad PD ut
AZ ad PH, & propterea PH rectangulo PD × AZ proportionalis, & conjunctis
rationibus, PK × PH est ut contentum Kk × PD × AZ, & PK × PH × AZ ut Kk ×
PD × AZ qu. id est ut area PDdM, & AZ qu. conjunctim.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol. 2._ In data quavis Nodorum positione, motus horarius mediocris est
semissis motus horarii in Syzygiis Lunæ, ideoque est ad 16". 35"'. 16^{iv}.
36^v. ut quadratum Sinus distantiæ Nodorum à Syzygiis ad quadratum Radii,
sive ut AZ qu. ad AT qu. Nam si Luna uniformi cum motu perambulet
semicirculum QAq, summa omnium arearum PDdM, quo tempore Luna pergit à Q ad
M, erit area QMdE quæ ad circuli tangentem QE terminatur; & quo tempore
Luna attingit punctum n, summa illa erit area tota EQAn quam linea PD
describit; dein Luna pergente ab n ad q, linea PD cadet extra circulum, &
aream nqe ad circuli tangentem qe terminatam describet; quæ, quoniam Nodi
prius regrediebantur, jam verò progrediuntur, subduci debet de area priore,
& cum æqualis sit areæ QEN, relinquet semicirculum NQAn. Igitur summa
omnium arearum PDdM, quo tempore Luna semicirculum describit, est area
semicirculi; & summa omnium quo tempore Luna circulum describit est area
circuli totius. At area PDdM, ubi Luna versatur in Syzygiis, est
rectangulum sub arcu PM & radio MT; & summa omnium huic æqualium arearum,
quo tempore Luna circulum describit, est rectangulum sub circumferentia
tota & radio circuli; & hoc rectangulum, cum sit æquale duobus circulis,
duplo majus est quàm rectangulum prius. Proinde Nodi, eâ cum velocitate
uniformiter continuatâ quam habent in Syzygiis Lunaribus, spatium duplo
majus describerent quàm revera describunt; & propterea motus mediocris
quocum, si uniformiter continuaretur, spatium à se inæquabili cum motu
revera confectum describere possent, est semissis motus quem habent in
Syzygiis Lunæ. Unde cum motus orarius maximus, si Nodi in Quadraturis
versantur, sit 33". 10"'. 33^{iv}. 12^v, motus mediocris horarius in hoc
casu erit 16". 35"'. 16^{iv}. 36^v. Et cum motus horarius Nodorum semper
sit ut AZ qu. & area PDdM conjunctim, & propterea motus horarius Nodorum in
Syzygiis Lunæ ut AZ qu. & area PDdM conjunctim, id est (ob datam aream PDdM
in Syzygiis descriptam) ut AZ qu. erit etiam motus mediocris ut AZ qu.
atque adeo hic motus, ubi Nodi extra Quadraturas versantur, erit ad 16".
35"'. 16^{iv}. 36^v. ut AZ qu. ad AT qu. _Q. E. D._

Prop. XXXI. Prob. XI.

    _Invenire motum horarium Nodorum Lunæ in Orbe Elliptico._

[Illustration]

Designet Qpmaq Ellipsim, axe majore Qq, minore ab descriptam, QAq circulum
circumscriptum, T Terram in utriusque centro communi, S Solem, p Lunam in
Ellipsi moventem, & pm arcum quem data temporis particula quam minima
describit, N & n Nodos linea Nn junctos, pK & mk perpendicula in axem Qq
demissa & hinc inde producta, donec occurrant circulo in P & M, & lineæ
Nodorum in D & d. Et si Luna, radio ad Terram ducto, aream describat
tempori proportionalem, erit motus Nodi in Ellipsi ut area pDdm.

Nam si PF tangat circulum in P, & producta occurrat TN in F, & pf tangat
Ellipsin in p & producta occurrat eidem TN in f, conveniant autem hæ
Tangentes in axe TQ ad Y; & si ML designet spatium quod Luna in circulo
revolvens, interea dum describit arcum PM, urgente & impellente vi prædicta
3IT, motu transverso describere posset, & ml designet spatium quod Luna in
Ellipsi revolvens eodem tempore, urgente etiam vi 3IT, describere posset; &
producantur LP & lp donec occurrant plano Eclipticæ in G & g; & jungantur
FG & fg, quarum FG producta secet pf, pg & TQ in c, e & R respectivè, & fg
producta secet TQ in r: Quoniam vis 3IT seu 3PK in circulo est ad vim 3IT
seu 3pK in Ellipsi, ut PK ad pK, seu AT ad aT; erit spatium ML vi priore
genitum, ad spatium ml vi posteriore genitum, ut PK ad pK, id est ob
similes figuras PYKp & FYRc, ut FR ad cR. Est autem ML ad FG (ob similia
triangula PLM, PGF) ut PL ad PG, hoc est (ob parallelas Lk, PK, GR) ut pl
ad pe, id est (ob similia triangula plm, cpe) ut lm ad ce; & inversè ut LM
est ad lm, seu FR ad cR, ita est FG ad ce. Et propterea si fg esset ad ce
ut fY ad cY, id est ut fr ad cR, (hoc est ut fr ad FR & FR ad cR
conjunctim, id est ut fT ad FT & FG ad ce conjunctim,) quoniam ratio FG ad
ce utrinque ablata relinquit rationes fg ad FG & fT ad FT, foret fg ad FG
ut fT ad FT; propterea quod anguli, quos FG & fg subtenderent ad Terram T,
æquarentur inter se. Sed anguli illi (per ea quæ in præcedente Propositione
exposuimus) sunt motus Nodorum, quo tempore Luna in circulo arcum PM, in
Ellipsi arcum pm percurrit: & propterea motus Nodorum in Circulo & Ellipsi
æquarentur inter se. Hæc ita se haberent, si modo fg esset ad ce ut fY ad
cY, id est si fg æqualis esset ce × fY ÷ cY. Verum ob similia triangula
fgp, cep, est fg ad ce ut fp ad cp; ideoque fg æqualis est ce × fp ÷ cp, &
propterea angulus, quem fg revera subtendit, est ad angulum priorem, quem
FG subtendit, hoc est motus Nodorum in Ellipsi ad motum Nodorum in Circulo,
ut hæc fg seu ce × fp ÷ cp ad priorem fg seu ce × fY ÷ cY, id est ut fp ×
cY ad cp × fY, seu fp ad fY & cY ad cp; hoc est, si pb ipsi TN parallela
occurrat FP in b, ut Fb ad FY & FY ad FP; hoc est ut Fb ad FP seu Dp ad DP,
adeoque ut area Dpmd ad aream DPMd. Et propterea, cum area posterior
proportionalis sit motui Nodorum in Circulo, erit area prior proportionalis
motui Nodorum in Ellipsi.   _Q. E. D._

_Corol._ Igitur cum, in data Nodorum positione, summa omnium arearum pDdm,
quo tempore Luna pergit à Quadratura ad locum quemvis m, sit area mpQEd,
quæ ad Ellipseos Tangentem QE terminatur; & summa omnium arearum illarum,
in revolutione integra, sit area Ellipseos totius: motus mediocris Nodorum
in Ellipsi erit ad motum mediocrem Nodorum in circulo, ut Ellipsis ad
circulum, id est ut Ta ad TA, seu 68-11/12 ad 69-11/12. Et propterea, cum
motus mediocris horarius Nodorum in circulo sit ad 16". 35"'. 16^{iv}.
36^v. ut AZ qu. ad AT qu. si capiatur angulus 16". 21"'. 2^{iv}. 36^v. ad
angulum 16". 35"'. 16^{iv}. 36^v. ut 68-11/12 ad 69-11/12, erit motus
mediocris horarius Nodorum in Ellipsi ad 16". 21"'. 2^{iv}. 36^v. ut AZq.
ad ATq.; hoc est ut quadratum Sinus distantiæ Nodi à Sole ad quadratum
Radii.

Cæterum Luna, radio ad Terram ducto, aream velocius describit in Syzygiis
quàm in Quadraturis, & eo nomine tempus in Syzygiis contrahitur, in
Quadraturis producitur; & una cum tempore motus Nodorum augetur ac
diminuitur. Erat autem momentum areæ in Quadraturis Lunæ ad ejus momentum
in Syzygiis ut 10973 ad 11073; & propterea momentum mediocre in Octantibus
est ad excessum in Syzygiis, defectumque in Quadraturis, ut numerorum
semisumma 11023 ad eorundem semidifferentiam 50. Unde cum tempus Lunæ in
singulis Orbis particulis æqualibus sit reciprocè ut ipsius velocitas, erit
tempus mediocre in Octantibus ad excessum temporis in Quadrantibus, ac
defectum in Syzygiis, ab hac causa oriundum, ut 11023 ad 50 quam proxime.
Pergendo autem à Quadraturis ad Syzygias, invenio quod excessus momentorum
areæ in locis singulis, supra momentum minimum in Quadraturis, sit ut
quadratum Sinus distantiæ Lunæ à Quadrantibus quam proximè; & propterea
differentia inter momentum in loco quocunque & momentum mediocre in
Octantibus, est ut differentia inter quadratum Sinus distantiæ Lunæ à
Quadraturis & quadratum Sinus graduum 45, seu semissem quadrati Radii; &
incrementum temporis in locis singulis inter Octantes & Quadraturas, &
decrementum ejus inter Octantes & Syzygias est in eadem ratione. Motus
autem Nodorum, quo tempore Luna percurrit singulas Orbis particulas
æquales, acceleratur vel retardatur in duplicata ratione temporis. Est enim
motus iste, dum Luna percurrit PM, (cæteris paribus) ut ML, & ML est in
duplicata ratione temporis. Quare motus Nodorum in Syzygiis, eo tempore
confectus quo Luna datas Orbis particulas percurrit, diminuitur in
duplicata ratione numeri 11073 ad numerum 11023; estque decrementum ad
motum reliquum ut 100 ad 10973, ad motum verò totum ut 100 ad 11073 quam
proximè. Decrementum autem in locis inter Octantes & Syzygias, &
incrementum in locis inter Octantes & Quadraturas, est quam proxime ad hoc
decrementum, ut motus totus in locis illis ad motum totum in Syzygiis &
differentia inter quadratum Sinus distantiæ Lunæ à Quadratura & semissem
quadrati Radii ad semissem quadrati Radii, conjunctim. Unde si Nodi in
Quadraturis versentur, & capiantur loca duo æqualiter ab Octante hinc inde
distantia, & alia duo à Syzygiâ & Quadraturâ iisdem intervallis distantia,
deque decrementis motuum in locis duabus inter Syzygiam & Octantem,
subducantur incrementa motuum in locis reliquis duobus, quæ sunt inter
Octantem & Quadraturam; decrementum reliquum æquale erit decremento in
Syzygia: uti rationem ineunti facilè constabit. Proindeque decrementum
mediocre, quod de Nodorum motu mediocri subduci debet, est pars quarta
decrementi in Syzygia. Motus totus horarius Nodorum in Syzygiis (ubi Luna
radio ad Terram ducto aream tempori proportionalem describere supponebatur)
erat 32". 42"'. 5^{iv}. 12^v. Et decrementum motus Nodorum, quo tempore
Luna jam velocior describit idem spatium, diximus esse ad hunc motum ut 100
ad 11073; adeoque decrementum illud est 17"'. 43^{iv}. 10^v, cujus pars
quarta 4"'. 25^{iv}. 48^v, motui horario mediocri superius invento 16".
21"'. 2^{iv}. 36^v. subducta, relinquit 16". 16"'. 36^{iv}. 48^v. motum
mediocrem horarium correctum.

Si Nodi versantur extra Quadraturas, & spectentur loca bina à Syzygiis hinc
inde æqualiter distantia; summa motuum Nodorum, ubi Luna versatur in his
locis, erit ad summam motuum, ubi Luna in iisdem locis & Nodi in
Quadraturis versantur, ut AZ qu. ad AT qu. Et decrementa motuum, à causis
jam expositis oriunda, erunt ad invicem ut ipsi motus, adeoque motus
reliqui erunt ad invicem ut AZ qu. ad AT qu. & motus mediocres ut motus
reliqui. Est itaque motus mediocris horarius correctus, in dato quocunque
Nodorum situ, ad 16". 16"'. 36^{iv}. 48^v. ut AZ qu. ad AT qu.; id est ut
quadratum Sinus distantiæ Nodorum à Syzygiis ad quadratum Radii.

Prop. XXXII. Prob. XII.

    _Invenire motum medium Nodorum Lunæ._

Motus medius annuus est summa motuum omnium horariorum mediocrium in anno.
Concipe Nodum versari in N, & singulis horis completis retrahi in locum
suum priorem, ut non obstante motu suo proprio, datum semper servet situm
ad Stellas Fixas. Interea verò Solem S, per motum Terræ, progredi à Nodo, &
cursum annuum apparentem uniformiter complere. Sit autem Aa arcus datus
quam minimus, quem recta TS ad Solem semper ducta, intersectione sua &
circuli NAn, dato tempore quam minimo describit: & motus horarius mediocris
(per jam ostensa) erit ut AZq. id est (ob proportionales AZ, ZY) ut
rectangulum sub AZ & ZY, hoc est ut area AZYa. Et summa omnium horariorum
motuum mediocrium ab initio, ut summa omnium arearum aYZA, id est ut area
NAZ. Est autem maxima AZYa æqualis rectangulo sub arcu Aa & radio circuli;
& propterea summa omnium rectangulorum in circulo toto ad summam totidem
maximorum, ut area circuli totius ad rectangulum sub circumferentia tota &
radio; id est ut 1 ad 2. Motus autem horarius, rectangulo maximo
respondens, erat 16". 16"'. 36^{iv}. 48^v. Et hic motus, anno toto sidereo
dierum 365. 6 hor. 9 min. fit 39 gr. 38'. 5". 39"'. Ideoque hujus dimidium
19 gr. 49'. 2". 49"'½ est motus medius Nodorum circulo toti respondens. Et
motus Nodorum, quo tempore Sol pergit ab N ad A, est ad 19 gr. 49'. 2".
49"'½ ut area NAZ ad circulum totum.

[Illustration]

Hæc ita se habent, ex Hypothesi quod Nodus horis singulis in locum priorem
retrahitur, sic ut Sol anno toto completo ad Nodum eundem redeat à quo sub
initio digressus fuerat. Verum per motum Nodi fit ut Sol citius ad Nodum
revertatur, & computanda jam est abbreviatio temporis. Cum Sol anno toto
conficiat 360 gradus, & Nodus motu maximo eodem tempore conficeret 39 gr.
38'. 5". 39"'. seu 39,6349 gradus; & motus mediocris Nodi in loco quovis N
sit ad ipsius motum mediocrem in Quadraturis suis, ut AZq. ad ATq. erit
motus Solis ad motum Nodi in N, ut 360 ATq. ad 39,6349 AZq.; id est ut
9,0829032 ATq. ad AZq. Unde si circuli totius circumferentia NAn dividatur
in particulas æquales Aa, tempus quo Sol percurrat particulam Aa, si
circulus quiesceret, erit ad tempus quo percurrit eandem particulam, si
circulus una cum Nodis circa centrum T revolvatur, reciprocè ut 9,0829032
ATq. ad 9,0829032 ATq. + AZq. Nam tempus est reciprocè ut velocitas qua
particula percurritur, & hæc velocitas est summa velocitatum Solis & Nodi.
Igitur si tempus, quo Sol absque motu Nodi percurreret arcum NA, exponatur
per Sectorem NTA, & particula temporis quo percurreret arcum quam minimum
Aa, exponatur per Sectoris particulam ATa; & (perpendiculo aY in Nn
demisso) si in AZ capiatur dZ, ejus longitudinis ut sit rectangulum dZ in
ZY ad Sectoris particulam ATa ut AZq. ad 9,0829032 ATq. + AZq. id est ut
sit dZ ad ½AZ ut ATq. ad 9,0829032 ATq. + AZq.; rectangulum dZ in ZY
designabit decrementum temporis ex motu Nodi oriundum, tempore toto quo
arcus Aa percurritur. Et si punctum d tangit curvam NdGn, area curvilinea
NdZ erit decrementum totum, quo tempore arcus totus NA percurritur; &
propterea excessus Sectoris NAT supra aream NdZ erit tempus illud totum. Et
quoniam motus Nodi tempore minore minor est in ratione temporis, debebit
etiam area AaYZ diminui in eadem ratione. Id quod fiet si capiatur in AZ
longitudo eZ, quæ sit ad longitudinem AZ ut AZq. ad 9,08299032 ATq. + AZq.
Sic enim rectangulum eZ in ZY erit ad aream AZYa ut decrementum temporis,
quo arcus Aa percurritur, ad tempus totum, quo percurreretur si Nodus
quiesceret: Et propterea rectangulum illud respondebit decremento motus
Nodi. Et si punctum e tangat curvam NeFn, area tota NeZ, quæ summa est
omnium decrementorum, respondebit decremento toti, quo tempore arcus AN
percurritur; & area reliqua NAe respondebit motui reliquo, qui verus est
Nodi motus quo tempore arcus totus NA, per Solis & Nodi conjunctos motus,
percurritur. Jam verò si circuli radius AT ponatur 1, erit area semicirculi
1,570796; & area figuræ NeFnT, per methodum Serierum infinitarum quæsita,
prodibit 0,1188478. Motus autem qui respondet circulo toti erat 19 gr. 49'.
2". 49"'½; & propterea motus, qui figuræ NeFnT duplicatæ respondet, est 1
gr. 29'. 57". 51"'½. Qui de motu priore subductus relinquit 18 gr. 19'. 4".
58"'. motum totum Nodi inter sui ipsius Conjunctiones cum Sole; & hic motus
de Solis motu annuo graduum 360 subductus, relinquit 341 gr. 40'. 55". 2"'.
motum Solis inter easdem Conjunctiones. Iste autem motus est ad motum
annuum 360 gr. ut Nodi motus jam inventus 18 gr. 19'. 4". 58"'. ad ipsius
motum annuum, qui propterea erit 19 gr. 18'. 0". 22"'. Hic est motus medius
Nodorum in anno sidereo. Idem per Tabulas Astronomicas est 19 gr. 20'. 31".
1"'. Differentia minor est parte quadringentesima motus totius, & ab Orbis
Lunaris Excentricitate & Inclinatione ad planum Eclipticæ oriri videtur.
Per Excentricitatem Orbis motus Nodorum nimis acceleratur, & per ejus
Inclinationem vicissim retardatur aliquantulum, & ad justam velocitatem
reducitur.

Prop. XXXIII. Prob. XIII.

    _Invenire motum verum Nodorum Lunæ._

[Illustration]

In tempore quod est ut area NTA - NdZ, (_in Fig. præced._) motus iste est
ut area NAeN, & inde datur. Verum ob nimiam calculi difficultatem, præstat
sequentem Problematis constructionem adhibere. Centro C, intervallo quovis
CD, describatur circulus BEFD. Producatur DC ad A, ut sit AB ad AC ut motus
medius ad semissem motus veri mediocris, ubi Nodi sunt in Quadraturis: (id
est ut 19 gr. 18'. 0". 22"'. ad 19 gr. 49'. 2". 49"'½, atque adeo BC ad AC
ut motuum differentia 0 gr. 31'. 2". 27"'½, ad motum posteriorem 19 gr.
49'. 2". 49"'½, hoc est, ut 1. ad 38-1/3) dein per punctum D ducatur
infinita Gg, quæ tangat circulum in D; & si capiatur angulus BCE vel BCF
æqualis semissi distantiæ Solis à loco Nodi, per motum medium invento; &
agatur AE vel AF secans perpendiculum DG in G; & capiatur angulus qui sit
ad motum Nodi inter ipsius Syzygias (id est ad 9 gr. 10'. 40".) ut tangens
DG ad circuli BED circumferentiam totam, atque angulus iste ad motum medium
Nodorum addatur; habebitur eorum motus verus. Nam motus verus sic inventus
congruet quam proximè cum motu vero qui prodit exponendo tempus per aream
NTA - NdZ, & motum Nodi per aream NAeN; ut rem perpendenti constabit. Hæc
est æquatio annua motus Nodorum. Est & æquatio menstrua, sed quæ ad
inventionem Latitudinis Lunæ minimè necessaria est. Nam cum Variatio
inclinationis Orbis Lunaris ad planum Eclipticæ duplici inæqualitati
obnoxia sit, alteri annuæ, alteri autem menstruæ; hujus menstrua
inæqualitas & æquatio menstrua Nodorum ita se mutuò contemperant &
corrigunt, ut ambæ in determinanda Latitudine Lunæ negligi possint.

_Corol._ Ex hac & præcedente Propositione liquet quod Nodi in Syzygiis suis
quiescunt, in Quadraturis autem regrediuntur motu horario 16". 18"'.
41^{iv}½. Et quod æquatio motus Nodorum in Octantibus sit 1 gr. 30'. Quæ
omnia cum Phænomenis coelestibus probè quadrant.

Prop. XXXIV. Prob. XIV.

    _Invenire Variationem horariam inclinationis Orbis Lunaris ad planum
    Eclipticæ._

[Illustration]

Designent A & a Syzygias; Q & q Quadraturas; N & n Nodos; P locum Lunæ in
Orbe suo; p vestigium loci illius in plano Eclipticæ, & mTl motum
momentaneum Nodorum ut supra. Et si ad lineam Tm demittatur perpendiculum
PG, jungatur pG, & producatur ea donec occurrat Tl in g, & jungatur etiam
Pg: erit angulus PGp inclinatio orbis Lunaris ad planum Eclipticæ, ubi Luna
versatur in P; & angulus Pgp inclinatio ejusdem post momentum temporis
completum, adeoque angulus GPg Variatio momentanea inclinationis. Est autem
hic angulus GPg ad angulum GTg ut TG ad PG & Pp ad PG conjunctim. Et
propterea si pro momento temporis substituatur hora; cum angulus GTg (per
Prop. XXX.) sit ad angulum 33". 10"'. 33^{iv}. ut IT × PG × AZ ad AT cub.
erit angulus GPg (seu inclinationis horaria Variatio) ad angulum 33". 10"'.
33^{iv}. ut IT × AZ × TG × Pp ÷ PG ad AT cub.   _Q. E. I._

Hæc ita se habent ex Hypothesi quod Luna in Orbe circulari uniformiter
gyratur. Quod si orbis ille Ellipticus sit, motus mediocris Nodorum
minuetur in ratione axis minoris ad axem majorem; uti supra expositum est.
Et in eadem ratione minuetur etiam Sinus IT. Inclinationis autem Variatio
tantum augebitur per decrementum Sinus IT, quantum diminuitur per
decrementum motus Nodorum; & propterea idem manebit atque prius.

_Corol. 1._ Si ad Nn erigatur perpendiculum TF, sitque pM motus horarius
Lunæ in plano Eclipticæ; & perpendicula pK, Mk in QT demissa & utrinque
producta occurrant TF in H & h: erit Kk ad Mp ut pK seu IT ad AT, & TZ ad
AT ut TG ad Hp; ideoque IT × TG æquale Kk × Hp × TZ ÷ Mp, hoc est æquale
areæ HpMh ductæ in rationem TZ ÷ Mp: & propterea inclinationis Variatio
horaria ad 33". 10"'. 33^{iv}. ut HpMh ducta in AZ × {TZ ÷ Mp} × {Pp ÷ PG}
ad AT cub.

_Corol. 2._ Ideoque si Terra & Nodi singulis horis completis retraherentur
à locis suis novis, & in loca priora in instanti semper reducerentur, ut
situs eorum, per mensem integrum periodicum, datus maneret; tota
Inclinationis Variatio tempore mensis illius foret ad 33". 10"'. 33^{iv},
ut aggregatum omnium arearum HpMh, in revolutione puncti p generatarum, &
sub signis propriis + & - conjunctarum, ductum in AZ × TZ × Pp ÷ PG, ad Mp
× AT cub. id est ut circulus totus QAqa ductus in AZ × TZ × Pp ÷ PG ad Mp ×
AT cub. hoc est ut circumferentia QAqa ducta in AZ × TZ × Pp ÷ PG ad 2MP ×
AT quad.

_Corol. 3._ Proinde in dato Nodorum situ, Variatio mediocris horaria, ex
quâ per mensem uniformiter continuatâ Variatio illa menstrua generari
posset, est ad 33". 10"'. 33^{iv}. ut AZ × TZ × Pp ÷ PG ad 2ATq. id est
(cum Pp sit ad PG ut Sinus Inclinationis prædictæ ad Radium, & AZ × TZ ÷ AT
sit ad ½AT ut sinus duplicati anguli ATn ad Radium) ut inclinationis
ejusdem Sinus ductus in Sinum duplicatæ distantiæ Nodorum à Sole, ad
quadruplum quadratum Radii.

_Corol. 4._ Quoniam inclinationis horaria Variatio, ubi Nodi in Quadraturis
versantur, est (per Propositionem superiorem) ad angulum 33". 10"'.
33^{iv}. ut IT × AZ × TG × Pp ÷ PG ad AT cub. id est ut {IT × TG ÷ AT} ×
{Pp ÷ PG} ad AT; hoc est ut Sinus duplicatæ distantiæ Lunæ à Quadraturis
ductus in Pp ÷ PG ad radium duplicatum: summa omnium Variationum
horariarum, quo tempore Luna in hoc situ Nodorum transit à Quadratura ad
Syzygiam, (id est spatio horarum 177-1/6,) erit ad summam totidem angulorum
33". 10"'. 33^{iv}. seu 5878"½, ut summa omnium sinuum duplicatæ distantiæ
Lunæ à Quadraturis ducta in Pp ÷ PG ad summam totidem diametrorum; hoc est
ut diameter ducta in Pp ÷ PG, ad circumferentiam; id est si inclinatio sit
5 gr. 2', ut 7 × 876/10000 ad 22, seu 279 ad 10000. Proindeque Variatio
tota, ex summa omnium horariarum Variationum tempore prædicto conflata, est
164", seu 2'. 44".

Prop. XXXV. Prob. XV.

    _Dato tempore invenire Inclinationem Orbis Lunaris ad planum
    Eclipticæ._

[Illustration]

Sit AD Sinus inclinationis maximæ, & AB Sinus Inclinationis minimæ.
Bisecetur BD in C, & centro C, intervallo BC, describatur Circulus BGD. In
AC capiatur CE in ea ratione ad EB quam EB habet ad 2BA: Et si dato tempore
constituatur angulus AEG æqualis duplicatæ distantiæ Nodorum à Quadraturis,
& ad AD demittatur perpendiculum GH: erit AH Sinus inclinationis quæsitæ.

Nam GEq. æquale est GHq. + HEq. = BHD + HEq. = HBD + HEq. - BHq. = HBD +
BEq. - 2BH × BE = BEq. + 2EC × BH = 2EC × AB + 2EC × BH = 2EC × AH. Ideoque
cum 2EC detur, est GEq. ut AH. Designet jam AEg distantiam Nodorum à
Quadraturis post datum aliquod momentum temporis completum, & arcus Gg, ob
datum angulum GEg, erit ut distantia GE. Est autem Hh ad Gg ut GH ad GC, &
propterea Hh est ut contentum GH × Gg seu GH × GE; id est ut {GH ÷ GE} × GE
qu. seu {GH ÷ GE} × AH, id est ut AH & sinus anguli AEG conjunctim. Igitur
si AH in casu aliquo sit Sinus inclinationis, augebitur ea iisdem
incrementis cum sinu inclinationis, per Corol. 3. Propositionis superioris,
& propterea sinui illi æqualis semper manebit. Sed AH ubi punctum G incidit
in punctum alterutrum B vel D huic Sinui æqualis est, & propterea eidem
semper æqualis manet.   _Q. E. D._

In hac demonstratione supposui angulum BEG, qui distantia est Nodorum à
Quadraturis, uniformiter augeri. Nam omnes inæqualitatum minutias expendere
non vacat. Concipe jam angulum BEG rectum esse, & Gg esse augmentum
horarium distantiæ Nodorum & Solis ab invicem; & inclinationis Variatio
horaria (per Corol. 3. Prop. novissimæ) erit ad 33". 10"'. 33^{iv}. ut
contentum sub inclinationis Sinu AH & Sinu anguli recti BEG, qui est
duplicata distantia Nodorum à Sole, ad quadruplum quadratum Radii; id est
ut mediocris inclinationis Sinus AH ad radium quadruplicatum; hoc est (cum
inclinatio illa mediocris sit quasi 5 gr. 8'½.) ut ejus Sinus 896 ad radium
quadruplicatum 40000, sive ut 224 ad 10000. Est autem Variatio tota, Sinuum
differentiæ BD respondens, ad variationem illam horariam ut diameter BD ad
arcum Gg; id est ut diameter BD ad semicircumferentiam BGD & tempus horarum
2080, quo Nodus pergit à Quadraturis ad Syzygias, ad horam unam conjunctim;
hoc est ut 7 ad 11 & 2080 ad 1. Quare si rationes omnes conjungantur, fiet
Variatio tota BD ad 33". 10"'. 33^{iv}. ut 224 × 7 × 2080 ad 110000, id est
ut 2965 ad 100, & inde Variatio illa BD prodibit 16'. 24".

Hæc est inclinationis Variatio maxima quatenus locus Lunæ in Orbe suo non
consideratur. Nam inclinatio, si Nodi in Syzygiis versantur, nil mutatur ex
vario situ Lunæ. At si Nodi in Quadraturis consistunt, inclinatio major est
ubi Luna versatur in Syzygiis, quàm ubi ea versatur in Quadraturis, excessu
2'. 44"; uti in Propositionis superioris Corollario quarto indicavimus. Et
hujus excessus dimidio 1'. 22" Variatio tota mediocris BD in Quadraturis
Lunaribus diminuta fit 15'. 2", in ipsius autem Syzygiis aucta fit 17'.
46". Si Luna igitur in Syzygiis constituatur, Variatio tota, in transitu
Nodorum à Quadraturis ad Syzygias, erit 17'. 46". adeoque si Inclinatio,
ubi Nodi in Syzygiis versantur, sit 5 gr. 17'. 46". eadem, ubi Nodi sunt in
Quadraturis, & Luna in Syzygiis, erit 5 gr. Atque hæc ita se habere
confirmatur ex Observationibus. Nam statuunt Astronomi Inclinationem Orbis
Lunaris ad planum Eclipticæ, ubi Nodi sunt in Quadraturis & Luna in
oppositione Solis, esse quasi 5 gr. Ubi verò Nodi sunt in Syzygiis, eandem
docent esse 5 gr. 17'½ vel 5 gr. 18'.

Si jam desideretur Orbis Inclinatio illa, ubi Luna in Syzygiis & Nodi
ubivis versantur; fiat AB ad AD ut Sinus 5 gr. ad Sinum 5 gr. 17'. 46", &
capiatur angulus AEG æqualis duplicatæ distantiæ Nodorum à Quadraturis; &
erit AH Sinus Inclinationis quæsitæ. Huic Orbis Inclinationi æqualis est
ejusdem Inclinatio, ubi Luna distat 90 gr. à Nodis. Aliis in Lunæ locis
inæqualitas menstrua, quam Inclinationis variatio admittit, in calculo
Latitudinis Lunæ compensatur & quodammodo tollitur per inæqualitatem
menstruam motus Nodorum, (ut supra diximus) adeoque in calculo Latitudinis
illius negligi potest.

_Scholium._

Hactenus de motibus Lunæ quatenus Excentricitas Orbis non consideratur.
Similibus computationibus inveni, quod Apogæum ubi in Conjunctione vel
Oppositione Solis versatur, progreditur singulis diebus 23' respectu
Fixarum; ubi verò in Quadraturis est, regreditur singulis diebus 16-1/3
circiter: quodque ipsius motus medius annuus sit quasi 40 gr. Per Tabulas
Astronomicas à _Cl. Flamstedio_ ad Hypothesin _Horroxii_ accommodatas,
Apogæum in ipsius Syzygiis progreditur cum motu diurno 24'. 28", in
Quadraturis autem regreditur cum motu diurno 20'. 12", & motu medio annuo
40 gr. 41' fertur in consequentia. Quod differentia inter motum diurnum
progressivum Apogæi in ipsius Syzygiis, & motum diurnum regressivum in
ipsius Quadraturis, per Tabulas sit 4'. 16", per computationem verò nostram
6'-2/3, vitio Tabularum tribuendum esse suspicamur. Sed neque computationem
nostram satis accuratam esse putamus. Nam rationem quandam ineundo prodiere
Apogæi motus diurnus progressivus in ipsius Syzygiis, & motus diurnus
regressivus in ipsius Quadraturis, paulo majores. Computationes autem, ut
nimis perplexas & approximationibus impeditas, neque satis accuratas,
apponere non lubet.

Prop. XXXVI. Prob. XVI.

    _Invenire vim Solis ad Mare movendum._

[Illustration]

Solis vis ML seu PS, in Quadraturis Lunaribus, ad perturbandos motus
Lunares, erat (per Prop. XXV. hujus) ad vim gravitatis apud nos ut 1 ad
638092,6. Et vis SM - LM seu 2PK in Syzygiis Lunaribus est duplo major. Hæ
autem vires, si descendatur ad superficiem Terræ, diminuuntur in ratione
distantiarum à centro Terræ, id est in ratione 60½ ad 1; adeoque vis prior
in superficie Terræ est ad vim gravitatis ut 1 ad 38604600. Hac vi Mare
deprimitur in locis quæ 90 gr. distant à Sole. Vi alterâ quæ duplo major
est Mare elevatur, & sub Sole & in regione Soli opposita. Summa virium est
ad vim gravitatis ut 1 ad 12868200. Et quoniam vis eadem eundem ciet motum,
sive ea deprimat Aquam in regionibus quæ 90 gr. distant à Sole, sive elevet
eandem in regionibus sub Sole & Soli oppositis, hæc summa erit tota Solis
vis ad Mare agitandum; & eundem habebit effectum ac si tota in regionibus
sub Sole & Soli oppositis mare elevaret, in regionibus autem quæ 90 gr.
distant à Sole nil ageret.

_Corol._ Hinc cum vis centrifuga partium Terræ à diurno Terræ motu oriunda,
quæ est ad vim gravitatis ut 1 ad 291, efficiat ut altitudo Aquæ sub
Æquatore superet ejus altitudinem sub polis mensura pedum Parisiensium
85200, vis Solaris, de qua egimus, cum sit ad vim gravitatis ut 1 ad
12868200, atque adeo ad vim illam centrifugam ut 291 ad 12868200 seu 1 ad
44221, efficiet ut altitudo aquæ in regionibus sub Sole & Soli oppositis
superet altitudinem ejus in locis quæ 90 gradibus distant à Sole, mensura
tantum pedis unius Parisiensis & digitorum undecim. Est enim hæc mensura ad
mensuram pedum 85200 ut 1 ad 44221.

Prop. XXXVII. Prob. XVII.

    _Invenire vim Lunæ ad Mare movendum._

Vis Lunæ ad mare movendum colligenda est ex ejus proportione ad vim Solis,
& hæc proportio colligenda est ex proportione motuum maris, qui ab his
viribus oriuntur. Ante ostium fluvii _Avonæ_, ad lapidem tertium infra
_Bristoliam_, tempore verno & autumnali totus aquæ ascensus in Conjunctione
& Oppositione Luminarium (observante _Samuele Sturmio_) est pedum plus
minus 45, in Quadraturis autem est pedum tantum 25: Altitudo prior ex summa
virium, posterior ex earundem differentia oritur. Solis igitur & Lunæ in
Æquatore versantium & mediocriter à Terra distantium, sunto vires S & L. Et
quoniam Luna in Quadraturis, tempore verno & autumnali extra Æquatorem in
declinatione graduum plus minus 23½ versatur, & Luminaris ab Æquatore
declinantis vis ad mare movendum minor sit, idque (quantum sentio) in
duplicata ratione Sinus complementi declinationis quam proximè, vis Lunæ in
Quadraturis, (cum sinus ille sit ad radium ut 91706 ad 100000) erit
841/1000 L, & summa virium in Syzygiis erit L + S, ac differentia in
Quadraturis 841/1000 L - S, adeoque L + S erit ad 841/1000 L - S ut 45 ad
25 seu 9 ad 5, & inde 5L + 5S æqualis erit 7569/1000 L - 9S, & 14S æqualis
2569/1000 L, & propterea L ad S ut 14000 ad 2569 seu 5-7/15 ad 1. In Portu
_Plymuthi_ æstus maris (ex observatione _Samuelis Colepressi_) ad pedes
plus minus sexdecim, altitudine mediocri attollitur, ac tempore verno &
autumnali altitudo æstus in Syzygiis Lunæ superare potest altitudinem ejus
in Quadraturis pedibus septem vel octo. Si excessus mediocris his
temporibus sit pedum septem cum dimidio; æstus in Syzygiis ascendet ad
pedes 19¾, in Quadraturis ad pedes 12¼, & sic L + S erit ad 841/1000 L - S
ut 19¾ ad 12¼, & inde L ad S ut 734 ad 100 seu 7-1/3 ad 1. Est igitur vis
Lunæ ad vim Solis per computationem priorem ut 5-7/15 ad 1, per posteriorem
ut 7-1/3 ad 1. Donec aliquid certius ex Observationibus accuratius
institutis constiterit, usurpabimus proportionem mediocrem 6-1/3 ad 1. Unde
cum vis Solis sit ad vim gravitatis ut 1 ad 12868200, vis Lunæ erit ad vim
gravitatis ut 1 ad 2031821.

_Corol. 1._ Igitur cum aqua vi Solis agitata ad altitudinem pedis unius &
undecim digitorum ascendat, eadem vi Lunæ ascendet ad altitudinem pedum
duodecim. Tanta autem vis ad omnes maris motus excitandos abunde sufficit,
& quantitati motuum probe respondet. Nam in maribus quæ ab Oriente in
Occidentem latè patent, uti in Mari _Pacifico_, & Maris _Atlantici_ &
_Æthiopici_ partibus extra Tropicos, aqua attolli solet ad altitudinem
pedum sex, novem duodecim vel quindecim. In mari autem _Pacifico_, quod
profundius est & latius patet, æstus dicuntur esse majores quàm in
_Atlantico_ & _Æthiopico_. Etenim ut plenus sit æstus, latitudo Maris ab
Oriente in Occidentem non minor esse debet quàm graduum nonaginta. In Mari
_Æthiopico_, ascensus aquæ intra Tropicos minor est quàm in Zonis
temperatis, propter angustiam Maris inter _Africam_ & Australem partem
_Americæ_. In medio Mari aqua nequit ascendere nisi ad littus utrumque &
orientale & occidentale simul descendat: cum tamen vicibus alternis ad
littora illa in Maribus nostris angustis descendere debeat. Ea de causa
fluxus & refluxus in Insulis, quæ à littoribus longissimè absunt,
perexiguus esset solet. In Portubus quibusdam, ubi aqua cum impetu magno
per loca vadosa, ad Sinus alternis vicibus implendos & evacuandos, influere
& effluere cogitur, fluxus & refluxus sunt solito majores, uti ad
_Plymuthum_ & pontem _Chepstowæ_ in _Anglia_; ad montes _S. Michaelis_ &
urbem _Abrincatuorum_ (vulgo _Auranches_) in _Normania_; ad _Cambaiam_ &
_Pegu_ in _India_ orientali. His in locis mare, magna cum velocitate
accedendo & recedendo, littora nunc inundat nunc arida relinquit ad multa
Milliaria. Neque impetus influendi & remeandi prius frangi potest, quam
aqua attollitur vel deprimitur ad pedes 30, 40 vel 50 & amplius. Et par est
ratio fretorum oblongorum & vadosorum, uti _Magellanici_ & ejus quo
_Anglia_ circundatur. Æstus in hujusmodi portubus & fretis per impetum
cursus & recursus supra modum augetur. Ad littora verò quæ descensu
præcipiti ad mare profundum & apertum spectant, ubi aqua sine impetu
effluendi & remeandi attolli & subsidere potest, magnitudo æstus respondet
viribus Solis & Lunæ.

_Corol. 2._ Cum vis Lunæ ad mare movendum sit ad vim gravitatis ut 1 ad
2031821, perspicuum est quod vis illa sit longè minor quàm quæ vel in
experimentis Pendulorum, vel in Staticis aut Hydrostaticis quibuscunque
sentiri possit. In æstu solo marino hæc vis sensibilem edit effectum.

_Corol. 3._ Quoniam vis Lunæ ad mare movendum est ad Solis vim consimilem
ut 6-1/3 ad 1, & vires illæ sunt ut densitates corporum Lunæ & Solis & cubi
diametrorum apparentium conjunctim; erit densitas Lunæ ad densitatem Solis
ut 6-1/3 ad 1 directè & cubus diametri Solis ad cubum diametri Lunæ
inversè, id est (cum diametri mediocres apparentes Solis & Lunæ sint 31'.
27". & 32'. 12".) ut 34 ad 5. Densitas autem Solis erat ad densitatem Terræ
ut 100 ad 387, & propterea densitas Lunæ est ad densitatem Terræ ut 600 ad
387, seu 9 ad 5 quam proximè. Est igitur corpus Lunæ densius & magis
terrestre quàm Terra nostra.

_Corol. 4._ Unde cum vera diameter Lunæ sit ad veram diametrum Terræ ut 1
ad 3,6½, erit massa Lunæ ad massam Terræ ut 1 ad 26 quam proximè.

_Corol. 5._ Et gravitas acceleratrix in superficie Lunæ, erit quasi duplo
minor quàm gravitas acceleratrix in superficie Terræ.

Prop. XXXVIII. Prob. XVIII.

    _Invenire figuram corporis Lunæ._

Si corpus Lunare fluidum esset ad instar maris nostri, vis Terræ ad fluidum
illud in partibus & citimis & ultimis elevandum, esset ad vim Lunæ, qua
mare nostrum in partibus & sub Luna & Lunæ oppositis attollitur, ut
gravitas acceleratrix Lunæ in Terram ad gravitatem acceleratricem Terræ in
Lunam & diameter Lunæ ad diametrum Terræ conjunctim; id est ut 26 ad 1 & 5
ad 18 conjunctim seu 65 ad 9. Unde cum mare nostrum vi Lunæ attollatur ad
pedes duodecim, fluidum Lunare vi Terræ attolli deberet ad pedes fere
nonaginta. Eaque de causa figura Lunæ Sphærois esset, cujus maxima diameter
producta transiret per centrum Terræ, & superaret diametros perpendiculares
excessu pedum 180. Talem igitur figuram Luna affectat, eamque sub initio
induere debuit.   _Q. E. I._

_Corol._ Inde verò fit ut eadem semper Lunæ facies in Terram obvertatur. In
alio enim situ corpus Lunare quiescere non potest, sed ad hunc situm
oscillando semper redibit. Attamen oscillationes ob parvitatem virium
agitantium essent longè tardissimæ: adeò ut facies illa, quæ Terram semper
respicere deberet, possit alterum orbis Lunaris umbilicum, ob rationem
superius allatam respicere, neque statim abinde retrahi & in Terram
converti.

Lemma I.

[Illustration]

    _Si APEp Terram designet uniformiter densam, centroque C & polis P, p &
    æquatore AE delineatam; & si centro C radio CP describi intelligatur
    sphæra Pape; sit autem QR planum, cui recta à centro Solis ad centrum
    Terræ ducta normaliter insistit; & Terræ totius exterioris PapAPepE,
    quæ Sphærâ modò descriptâ altior est, particulæ singulæ conantur
    recedere hinc inde à plano QR, sitque conatus particulæ cujusque ut
    ejusdem distantia à plano: erit vis & efficacia tota particularum
    omnium, ad Terram circulariter movendam, quadruplo minor quàm vis tota
    particularum totidem in Æquatoris circulo AE, uniformiter per totum
    circuitum in morem annuli dispositarum, ad Terram consimili motu
    circulari movendam. Et motus iste circularis circa axem in plano QR
    jacentem, & axi Pp perpendiculariter insistentem, peragetur._

Sit enim IK circulus minor Æquatori AE parallelus, sitque L particula Terræ
in circulo illo extra globum Pape sita. Et si in planum QR demittatur
perpendiculum LM, vis tota particulæ illius ad Terram circa ipsius centrum
convertendum proportionalis erit eidem LM: & si hæc vis LM (per Legum
Corol. 2.) distinguatur in vires LN, NM; efficacia virium MN particularum
omnium L, in circuitu Terræ totius extra globum Pape consistentium, ad
Terram circa ipsius centrum secundum ordinem literarum ApEP convertendam,
erit ad efficaciam virium LN particularum omnium L, ad Terram circa ipsius
centrum secundum ordinem contrarium earundem literarum convertendam, ut
tria ad duo. Ideoque efficacia virium omnium MN erit ad excessum efficaciæ
hujus supra efficaciam virium omnium LN ut tria ad unum. Et si particulæ
illæ omnes locarentur in Æquatore, efficacia virium omnium LN evanesceret,
& efficacia virium omnium MN augeretur in ratione quatuor ad tria. Quare
excessus ille, qui est efficacia absoluta particularum in locis propriis,
est pars quarta efficaciæ particularum earundem in Æquatore. Motus autem
æquinoctiorum est ut hæc efficacia. Singula examinet qui volet. Brevitati
consulo.

Lemma II.

    _Motus autem Terræ totius circa axem illum, ex motibus particularum
    omnium compositus, erit ad motum annuli circa axem eundem, in ratione
    composita ex ratione materiæ in Terra ad materiam in annulo, & ratione
    trium quadratorum ex arcu quadrantali circuli cujuscunque, ad duo
    quadrata ex diametro; id est in ratione materiæ ad materiam & numeri
    925275 & 1000000._

Est enim motus Cylindri circa axem suum immotum revolventis, ad motum
Sphæræ inscriptæ & simul revolventis, ut quælibet quatuor æqualia quadrata
ad tres ex circulis sibi inscriptis: & motus Cylindri ad motum annuli
tenuissimi, Sphæram & Cylindrum ad communem eorum contactum ambientis, ut
duplum materiæ in Cylindro ad triplum materiæ in annulo; & annuli motus
iste circa axem Cylindri uniformiter continuatus, ad ejusdem motum
uniformem circa diametrum propriam, eodem tempore periodico factum, ut
circumferentia circuli ad duplum diametri.

Lemma III.

    _Si annulus, Terra omni reliqua sublata, solus in orbe Terræ motu annuo
    circa Solem ferretur, & interea circa axem suum, ad planum Eclipticæ in
    angulo graduum 23½ inclinatum, motu diurno revolveretur: idem foret
    motus Punctorum Æquinoctialium sive annulus iste fluidus esset, sive is
    ex materia rigida & firma constaret._

Prop. XXXIX. Prob. XIX.

    _Invenire Præcessionem Æquinoctiorum._

Motus mediocris horarius Nodorum Lunæ in Orbe circulari, ubi Nodi sunt in
Quadraturis, erat 16". 35"'. 16^{iv}. 36^v. & hujus dimidium 8". 17"'.
38^{iv}. 18^v. (ob rationes & supra explicatas) est motus medius horarius
Nodorum in tali Orbe; fitque anno toto sidereo 20 gr. 11'. 46". Quoniam
igitur Nodi Lunæ in tali Orbe conficerent annuatim 20 gr. 11'. 46". in
antecedentia; & si plures essent Lunæ motus Nodorum cujusque, per Corol.
16. Prop. LXVI. Lib. I. forent reciprocè ut tempora periodica; & propterea
si Luna spatio diei siderei juxta superficiem Terræ revolveretur, motus
annuus Nodorum foret ad 20 gr. 11'. 46". ut dies sidereus horarum 23. 56'.
ad tempus periodicum Lunæ dierum 27. 7 hor. 43'; id est ut 1436 ad 39343.
Et par est ratio Nodorum annuli Lunarum Terram ambientis; sive Lunæ illæ se
mutuò non contingant, sive liquescant & in annulum continuum formentur,
sive denique annulus ille rigescat & inflexibilis reddatur.

[Illustration]

Fingamus igitur quod annulus iste quoad quantitatem materiæ æqualis sit
Terræ omni PapAPepE, quæ globo PapE superior est; & quoniam globus iste est
ad Terram illam superiorem ut aC qu. ad AC qu. - aC qu. id est (cum Terræ
diameter minor PC vel aC sit ad diametrum majorem AC ut 689 ad 692) ut 4143
ad 474721 seu 1000 ad 114585; si annulus iste Terram secundum æquatorem
cingeret, & uterque simul circa diametrum annuli revolveretur, motus annuli
esset ad motum globi interioris (per hujus Lem. II.) ut 4143 ad 474721 &
1000000 ad 925275 conjunctim, hoc est ut 4143 ad 439248: ideoque motus
annuli esset ad summam motuum annuli & globi, ut 4143 ad 443991. Unde si
annulus globo adhæreat, & motum suum, quo ipsius Nodi seu puncta
æquinoctialia regrediuntur, cum globo communicet: motus qui restabit in
annulo erit ad ipsius motum priorem ut 4143 ad 443391; & propterea motus
punctorum æquinoctialium diminuetur in eadem ratione. Erit igitur motus
annuus punctorum æquinoctialium corporis ex globo & annulo compositi, ad
motum 20 gr. 11'. 46", ut 1436 ad 39343 & 4143 ad 443391 conjunctim, id est
ut 1 ad 2932. Vires autem quibus Nodi Lunarum (ut supra explicui) atque
adeò quibus puncta æquinoctialia annuli regrediuntur (id est vires 3IT, _in
Fig. pag. 444._) sunt in singulis particulis ut distantiæ particularum à
plano QR, & his viribus particulæ illæ planum fugiunt; & propterea (per
Lem. I.) si materia annuli per totam globi superficiem, in morem figuræ
PapAPepE, ad superiorem illam Terræ partem constituendam spargeretur, vis &
efficacia tota particularum omnium ad Terram circa quamvis Æquatoris
diametrum rotandam, atque adeo ad movenda puncta æquinoctialia, evaderet
quadruplo minor quàm prius. Ideoque annuus æquinoctiorum regressus jam
esset ad 20 gr. 11'. 46". ut 1 ad 11728, ac proinde fieret 6". 12"'.
2^{iv}. Hæc est præcessio Æquinoctiorum à vi Solis oriunda. Vis autem Lunæ
ad mare movendum erat ad vim Solis ut 6-1/3 ad 1, & hæc vis pro quantitate
sua augebit etiam præcessionem Æquinoctiorum. Ideoque præcessio illa ex
utraque causa oriunda jam fiet major in ratione 7-1/3 ad 1, & sic erit 45".
24"'. 15^{iv}. Hic est motus punctorum æquinoctialium ab actionibus Solis &
Lunæ in partes Terræ, quæ globo Pape incumbunt, oriundus. Nam Terra ab
actionibus illis in globum ipsum exercitis nullam in partem inclinari
potest.

[Illustration]

Designet jam APEp corpus Terræ figurâ Ellipticâ præditum, & ex uniformi
materiâ constans. Et si distinguatur idem in figuras innumeras Ellipticas
concentricas & consimiles, APEp, BQbq, CRcr, DSds, &c. quarum diametri sint
in progressione Geometrica: quoniam figuræ consimiles sunt, vires Solis &
Lunæ, quibus puncta æquinoctialia regrediuntur, efficerent ut figurarum
reliquarum seorsim spectatarum puncta eadem æquinoctialia eadem cum
velocitate regrederentur. Et par est ratio motus orbium singulorum AQEq,
BRbr, CScs, &c. qui sunt figurarum illarum differentiæ. Orbis
uniuscujusque, si solus esset, puncta æquinoctialia eadem cum velocitate
regredi deberent. Nec refert utrum orbis quilibet densior sit an rarior, si
modò ex materia uniformiter densa confletur. Unde etiam si orbes ad centrum
densiores sint quàm ad circumferentiam, idem erit motus æquinoctiorum Terræ
totius ac prius; si modo orbis unusquisque seorsim spectatus ex materia
uniformiter densa constet, & figura orbis non mutetur. Quod si figuræ
orbium mutentur, Terraque ad æquatorem AE, ob densitatem materiæ ad
centrum, jam altius ascendat quàm prius; regressus æquinoctiorum ex aucta
altitudine augebitur, idque in orbibus singulis seorsim existentibus, in
ratione majoris altitudinis materiæ juxta orbis illius æquatorem; in Terra
autem tota in ratione majoris altitudinis materiæ juxta æquatorem orbis non
extimi AQEq, non intimi Gg, sed mediocris alicujus CScs. Terram autem ad
centrum densiorem esse, & propterea sub Æquatore altiorem esse quàm ad
polos in majore ratione quàm 692 ad 689, in superioribus insinuavimus. Et
ratio majoris altitudinis colligi ferè potest ex majore diminutione
gravitatis sub æquatore, quàm quæ ex ratione 692 ad 689 consequi debeat.
Excessus longitudinis penduli, quod in Insula _Goree_ & in illâ _Cayennæ_
minutis singulis secundis oscillatur, supra longitudinem Penduli quod
_Parisiis_ eodem tempore oscillatur, à _Gallis_ inventi sunt pars decima &
pars octava digiti, qui tamen ex proportione 692 ad 689 prodiere 81/1000 &
89/1000. Major est itaque longitudo Penduli _Cayennæ_ quàm oportet, in
ratione 1/8 ad 89/1000, seu 1000 ad 712; & in Insula _Goree_ in ratione
1/10 ad 81/1000 seu 1000 ad 810. Si sumamus rationem mediocrem 1000 ad 760;
minuenda erit gravitas Terræ ad æquatorem, & ibidem augenda ejus altitudo,
in ratione 1000 ad 760 quam proximè. Unde motus æquinoctiorum (ut supra
dictum est) auctus in ratione altitudinis Terræ, non ad orbem extimum, non
ad intimum, sed ad intermedium aliquem, id est, non in ratione maxima 1000
ad 760, non in minima 1000 ad 1000, sed in mediocri aliqua, puta 10 ad
8-1/3 vel 6 ad 5, evadet annuatim 54". 29"'. 6^{iv}.

Rursus hic motus, ob inclinationem plani Æquatoris ad planum Eclipticæ,
minuendus est, idque in ratione Sinus complementi inclinationis ad Radium.
Nam distantia particulæ cujusque terrestris à plano QR, quo tempore
particula illa à plano Eclipticæ longissimè distat, in Tropico suo (ut ita
dicam) consistens, diminuitur, per inclinationem planorum Eclipticæ &
Æquatoris ad invicem, in ratione Sinus complementi inclinationis ad Radium.
Et in ratione distantiæ illius diminuitur etiam vis particulæ ad æquinoctia
movenda. In eadem quoque ratione diminuitur summa virium particulæ ejusdem,
in locis hinc inde à Tropico æqualiter distantibus: uti ex prædemonstratis
facilè ostendi possit: & propterea vis tota particulæ illius, in
revolutione integrâ, ad æquinoctia movenda, ut & vis tota particularum
omnium, & motus æquinoctiorum à vi illa oriundus, diminuitur in eadem
ratione. Igitur cum inclinatio illa sit 23½ gr. diminuendus est motus 54".
29"'. in ratione Sinus 91706 (qui sinus est complementi graduum 23½) ad
Radium 100000. Qua ratione motus iste jam fiet 49". 58"'. Regrediuntur
igitur puncta æquinoctiorum motu annuo (juxta computationem nostram) 49".
58"', fere ut Phænomena coelestia requirunt. Nam regressus ille annuus ex
observationibus Astronomorum est 50".

Descripsimus jam Systema Solis, Terræ & Planetarum: superest ut de Cometis
nonnulla adjiciantur.

Lemma IV.

    _Cometas esse Lunâ superiores & in regione Planetarum versari._

[Illustration]

Ut defectus Parallaxeos diurnæ extulit Cometas supra regiones sublunares,
sic ex Parallaxi annua convincitur eorum descensus in regiones Planetarum.
Nam Cometæ qui progrediuntur secundum ordinem signorum sunt omnes, sub
exitu apparitionis, aut solito tardiores aut retrogradi, si Terra est inter
ipsos & Solem, at justo celeriores si Terra vergit ad oppositionem. Et è
contra, qui pergunt contra ordinem signorum sunt justo celeriores in fine
apparitionis, si Terra versatur inter ipsos & Solem; & justo tardiores vel
retrogradi si Terra sita est ad contrarias partes. Contingit hoc maximè ex
motu Terræ in vario ipsius situ, perinde ut fit in Planetis, qui, pro motu
Terræ vel conspirante vel contrario, nunc retrogradi sunt, nunc tardiùs
moveri videntur, nunc verò celeriùs. Si Terra pergit ad eandem partem cum
Cometa, & motu angulari circa Solem celerius fertur, Cometa è Terra
spectatus, ob motum suum tardiorem, apparet esse retrogradus; sin Terra
tardiùs fertur, motus Cometæ, (detracto motu Terræ) fit saltem tardior. At
si Terra pergit in contrarias partes, Cometa exinde velocior apparet. Ex
acceleratione autem vel retardatione vel motu retrogrado distantia Cometæ
in hunc modum colligitur. Sunto [Aries]QA, [Aries]QB, [Aries]QC observatæ
tres longitudines Cometæ, sub initio motus, sitque [Aries]QF longitudo
ultimò observata, ubi Cometa videri desinit. Agatur recta ABC, cujus partes
AB, BC rectis QA & QB, QB & QC interjectæ, sint ad invicem ut tempora inter
observationes tres primas. Producatur AC ad G, ut sit AG ad AB ut tempus
inter observationem primam & ultimam, ad tempus inter observationem primam
& secundam, & jungatur QG. Et si Cometa moveretur uniformiter in linea
recta, atque Terra vel quiesceret, vel etiam in linea recta, uniformi cum
motu, progrederetur; foret angulus [Aries]QG longitudo Cometæ tempore
Observationis ultimæ. Angulus igitur FQG, qui longitudinum differentia est,
oritur ab inæqualitate motuum Cometæ ac Terræ. Hic autem angulus, si Terra
& Cometa in contrarias partes moventur, additur angulo AQG, & sic motum
apparentem Cometæ velociorem reddit: Sin Cometa pergit in easdem partes cum
Terra, eidem subducitur, motumque Cometæ vel tardiorem reddit, vel forte
retrogradum; uti modò exposui. Oritur igitur hic angulus præcipuè ex motu
Terræ, & idcirco pro parallaxi Cometæ meritò [Illustration] habendus est,
neglecto videlicet ejus incremento vel decremento nonnullo, quod à Cometæ
motu inæquabili in orbe proprio oriri possit. Distantia verò Cometæ ex hac
parallaxi sic colligitur. Designet S Solem, acT Orbem magnum, a locum Terræ
in observatione prima, c locum Terræ in observatione secunda, T locum Terræ
in observatione ultima, & T[Aries] lineam rectam versus principium Arietis
ductam. Sumatur angulus [Aries]TV æqualis angulo [Aries]QF, hoc est æqualis
longitudini Cometæ ubi Terra versatur in T. Jungatur ac, & producatur ea ad
g, ut sit ag ad ac ut AG ad AC, & erit g locus quem Terra tempore
observationis ultimæ, motu in recta ac uniformiter continuato, attingeret.
Ideoque si ducatur g[Aries] ipsi T[Aries] parallela, & capiatur angulus
[Aries]gV angulo [Aries]QG æqualis, erit hic angulus [Aries]gV æqualis
longitudini Cometæ è loco g spectati; & angulus TVg parallaxis erit, quæ
oritur à translatione Terræ de loco g in locum T: ac proinde V locus erit
Cometæ in plano Eclipticæ. Hic autem locus V orbe Jovis inferior esse
solet.

Idem colligitur ex curvatura viæ Cometarum. Pergunt hæc corpora propemodum
in circulis maximis quamdiu moventur celerius; at in fine cursus, ubi motus
apparentis pars illa quæ à parallaxi oritur, majorem habet proportionem ad
motum totum apparentem, deflectere solent ab his circulis, & quoties Terra
movetur in unam partem abire in partem contrariam. Oritur hæc deflexio
maximè ex Parallaxi, propterea quod respondet motui Terræ; & insignis ejus
quantitas meo computo collocavit disparentes Cometas satis longè infra
Jovem. Unde consequens est quòd in Perigæis & Periheliis, ubi propius
adsunt, descendunt sæpius infra orbes Martis & inferiorum Planetarum.

Confirmatur etiam propinquitas Cometarum ex luce capitum. Nam corporis
coelestis à Sole illustrati & in regiones longinquas abeuntis diminuitur
splendor in quadruplicata ratione distantiæ: in duplicata ratione videlicet
ob auctam corporis distantiam à Sole, & in alia duplicata ratione ob
diminutam diametrum apparentem. Unde si detur & lucis quantitas & apparens
diameter Cometæ, dabitur distantia, dicendo quod distantia sit ad
distantiam Planetæ in ratione integra diametri ad diametrum directè &
ratione dimidiata lucis ad lucem inversè. Sic minima Capillitii Cometæ anni
1682 diameter, per Tubum opticum sexdecim pedum à _Cl. Flamstedio_
observata & micrometro mensurata, æquabat 2'. 0". Nucleus autem seu stella
in medio capitis vix decimam partem latitudinis hujus occupabat, adeoque
lata erat tantum 11" vel 12". Luce verò & claritate capitis superabit caput
Cometæ anni 1680, stellasque primæ vel secundæ magnitudinis æmulabatur.
Ponamus Saturnum cum annulo suo quasi quadruplo lucidiorem fuisse: &
quoniam lux annuli propemodum æquabat lucem globi intermedii, & diameter
apparens globi sit quasi 21", adeoque lux globi & annuli conjunctim æquaret
lucem globi, cujus diameter esset 30": erit distantiæ Cometæ ad distantiam
Saturni ut 1 ad [sqrt]4 inversè, & 12" ad 30" directè, id est ut 24 ad 30
seu 4 ad 5. Rursus Cometa anni 1665 mense _Aprili_, ut Author est
_Hevelius_, claritate sua pene fixas omnes superabat, quinetiam ipsum
Saturnum, ratione coloris videlicet longè vividioris. Quippe lucidior erat
hic Cometa altero illo, qui in fine anni præcedentis apparuerat & cum
stellis primæ magnitudinis conferebatur. Latitudo capillitii erat quasi 6',
at nucleus cum Planetis ope Tubi optici collatus, plane minor erat Jove, &
nunc minor corpore intermedio Saturni, nunc ipsi æqualis judicabatur. Porrò
cum diameter Capillitii Cometarum rarò superet 8' vel 12', diameter verò
Nuclei seu stellæ centralis sit quasi decima vel fortè decima quinta pars
diametri capillitii, patet Stellas hasce ut plurimum ejusdem esse
apparentis magnitudinis cum Planetis. Unde cum lux eorum cum luce Saturni
non rarò conferri possit, eamque aliquando superet; manifestum est quod
Cometæ omnes in Periheliis vel infra Saturnum collocandi sint, vel non
longe supra. Errant igitur toto coelo qui Cometas in regionem Fixarum prope
ablegant: qua certè ratione non magis illustrari deberent à Sole nostro,
quàm Planetæ, qui hic sunt, illustrantur à Stellis fixis.

Hæc disputavimus non considerando obscurationem Cometarum per fumum illum
maximè copiosum & crassum, quo caput circundatur, quasi per nubem obtusè
semper lucens. Nam quanto obscurius redditur corpus per hunc fumum, tanto
propius ad Solem accedat necesse est, ut copia lucis à se reflexa Planetas
æmuletur. Inde verisimile fit Cometas longe infra Sphæram Saturni
descendere, uti ex Parallaxi probavimus. Idem verò quam maximè confirmatur
ex Caudis. Hæ vel ex reflexione fumi sparsi per æthera, vel ex luce capitis
oriuntur. Priore casu minuenda est distantia Cometarum, ne fumus à Capite
semper ortus per spatia nimis ampla incredibili cum velocitate & expansione
propagetur. In posteriore referenda est lux omnis tam caudæ quàm capillitii
ad Nucleum capitis. Igitur si imaginemur lucem hanc omnem congregari &
intra discum Nuclei coarctari, Nucleus ille jam certè, quoties caudam
maximam & fulgentissimam emittit, Jovem ipsum splendore suo multum
superabit. Minore igitur cum diametro apparente plus lucis emittens, multò
magis illustrabitur à Sole, adeoque erit Soli multò propior. Quinetiam
capita sub Sole delitescentia, & caudas cum maximas tum fulgentissimas
instar trabium ignitarum nonnunquam emittentia, eodem argumento infra orbem
Veneris collocari debent. Nam lux illa omnis si in stellam congregari
supponatur, ipsam Venerem ne dicam Veneres plures conjunctas quandoque
superaret.

Idem denique colligitur ex luce capitum crescente in recessu Cometarum à
Terra Solem versus, ac decrescente in eorum recessu à Sole versus Terram.
Sic enim Cometa posterior Anni 1665 (observante _Hevelio_,) ex quo conspici
cæpit, remittebat semper de motu suo, adeoque præterierat Perigæum;
Splendor verò capitis nihilominus indies crescebat, usque dum Cometa radiis
Solaribus obtectus desiit apparere. Cometa Anni 1683, observante eodem
_Hevelio_, in fine Mensis _Julii_ ubi primum conspectus est, tardissimè
movebatur, minuta prima 40 vel 45 circiter singulis diebus in orbe suo
conficiens. Ex eo tempore motus ejus diurnus perpetuo augebatur usque ad
_Sept. 4._ quando evasit graduum quasi quinque. Igitur toto hoc tempore
Cometa ad Terram appropinquabat. Id quod etiam ex diametro capitis
micrometro mensurata colligitur: quippe quam _Hevelius_ reperit _Aug. 6._
esse tantum 6'. 5" inclusâ comâ, at _Sept. 2._ esse 9'. 7". Caput igitur
initio longe minus apparuit quàm in fine motus, at initio tamen in vicinia
Solis longe lucidius extitit quàm circa finem, ut refert idem _Hevelius_.
Proinde toto hoc tempore, ob recessum ipsius à Sole, quoad lumen decrevit,
non obstante accessu ad Terram. Cometa Anni 1618 circa medium Mensis
_Decembris_, & iste Anni 1680 circa finem ejusdem Mensis, celerrimè
movebantur, adeoque tunc erant in Perigæis. Verum splendor maximus capitum
contigit ante duas fere septimanas, ubi modò exierant de radiis Solaribus;
& splendor maximus caudarum paulo ante, in majore vicinitate Solis. Caput
Cometæ prioris, juxta observationes _Cysati_, _Decem. 1._ majus videbatur
stellis primæ magnitudinis, & _Decem. 16._ (jam in Perigæo existens)
magnitudine parùm, splendore seu claritate luminis plurimum defecerat.
_Jan. 7._ _Keplerus_ de capite incertus finem fecit observandi. Die 12
mensis _Decemb._ conspectum & à _Flamstedio_ observatum est caput Cometæ
posterioris, in distantia novem graduum à Sole; id quod stellæ tertiæ
magnitudinis vix concessum fuisset. _Decem. 15 & 17_ apparuit idem ut
stella tertiæ magnitudinis, diminutum utique splendore Nubium juxta Solem
occidentum. _Decem. 26._ velocissimè motus, inque Perigæo propemodum
existens, cedebat ori Pegasi, Stellæ tertiæ magnitudinis. _Jan. 3._
apparebat ut Stella quartæ, _Jan. 9._ ut Stella quintæ, _Jan. 13._ ob
splendorem Lunæ crescentis disparuit. _Jan. 25._ vix æquabat Stellas
magnitudinis septimæ. Si sumantur æqualia à Perigæo hinc inde tempora,
capita quæ temporibus illis in longinquis regionibus posita, ob æquales à
Terra distantias, æqualiter lucere debuissent, in plaga Solis maximè
splenduere, ex altera Perigæi parte evanuere. Igitur ex magna lucis in
utroque situ differentia concluditur magna Solis & Cometæ vicinitas in situ
priore. Nam lux Cometarum regularis esse solet, & maxima apparere ubi
capita velocissimè moventur, atque adeo sunt in Perigæis; nisi quatenus ea
major est in vicinia Solis.

_Corol. 1._ Splendent igitur Cometæ luce Solis à se reflexa.

_Corol. 2._ Ex dictis etiam intelligitur cur Cometæ tantopere frequentant
regionem Solis. Si cernerentur in regionibus longè ultra Saturnum deberent
sæpius apparere in partibus Soli oppositis. Forent enim Terræ vicinioris
qui in his partibus versarentur, & Sol interpositus obscuraret cæteros.
Verum percurrendo historias Cometarum reperi quod quadruplo vel quintuplo
plures detecti sunt in Hemisphærio Solem versus, quàm in Hemisphærio
opposito, præter alios procul dubio non paucos quos lux Solaris obtexit.
Nimirum in descensu ad regiones nostras neque caudas emittunt, neque adeo
illustrantur à Sole, ut nudis oculis se prius detegendos exhibeant, quàm
sint ipso Jove propiores. Spatii autem tantillo intervallo circa Solem
descripti pars longè major sita est à latere Terræ quod Solem respicit;
inque parte illa majore Cometæ Soli ut plurimum viciniores magis illuminari
solent.

_Corol. 3._ Hinc etiam manifestum est, quod coeli resistentia destituuntur.
Nam Cometæ vias obliquas & nonnunquam cursui Planetarum contrarias secuti,
moventur omnifariam liberrimè, & motus suos etiam contra cursum Planetarum
diutissimè conservant. Fallor ni genus Planetarum sint, & motu perpetuo in
orbem redeant. Nam quod Scriptores aliqui Meteora esse volunt, argumentum à
capitum perpetuis mutationibus ducentes, fundamento carere videtur. Capita
Cometarum Atmosphæris ingentibus cinguntur; & Atmosphæræ infernè densiores
esse debent. Unde nubes sunt non ipsa Cometarum corpora, in quibus
mutationes illæ visuntur. Sic Terra si è Planetis spectaretur, luce nubium
suarum proculdubio splenderet, & corpus firmum sub nubibus prope
delitesceret. Sic cingula Jovis in nubibus Planetæ illius formata, situm
mutant inter se, & firmum Jovis corpus per nubes illas difficilius
cernitur. Et multo magis corpora Cometarum sub Atmosphæris & profundioribus
& crassioribus abscondi debent.

Prop. XL. Theor. XXI.

    _Cometas in Sectionibus conicis umbilicos in centro Solis habentibus
    moveri, & radiis ad solem ductis areas temporibus proportionales
    describere._

Patet per Corol. 1. Prop. XIII. Libri primi, collatum cum Prop. VIII, XII &
XIII. Libri tertii.

_Corol. 1._ Hinc si Cometæ in orbem redeunt, orbes erunt Ellipses, &
tempora periodica erunt ad tempora periodica Planetarum in ratione
sesquialtera transversorum axium. Ideoque Cometæ maxima ex parte supra
Planetas versantes, & eo nomine orbes axibus majoribus describentes,
tardius revolventur. Ut si axis orbis Cometæ sit quadruplo major axe orbis
Saturni, tempus revolutionis Cometæ erit ad tempus revolutionis Saturni, id
est ad annos 30, ut 4[sqrt]4 (seu 8) ad 1, ideoque erit annorum 240.

_Corol. 2._ Orbes autem erunt Parabolis adeo finitimi, ut eorum vice
Parabolæ absque erroribus sensibilibus adhiberi possunt.

_Corol. 3._ Et propterea, per Corol. 7. Prop. XVI. Lib. I. velocitas Cometæ
omnis erit semper ad velocitatem Planetæ cujusvis circa Solem in circulo
revolventis, in dimidiata ratione duplicatæ distantiæ Cometæ à centro Solis
ad distantiam Planetæ à centro Solis quamproximè. Ponamus radium orbis
magni, seu Ellipseos in qua Terra revolvitur semidiametrum transversam,
esse partium 100000000, & Terra motu suo diurno mediocri describet partes
1720212, & motu horario partes 71675½. Ideoque Cometa in eadem Telluris à
Sole distantia mediocri, ea cum velocitate quæ sit ad velocitatem Telluris
ut [sqrt]2 ad 1, describet motu suo diurno partes 2432747, & motu horario
partes 101364½. In majoribus autem vel minoribus distantiis, motus tum
diurnus tum horarius erit ad hunc motum diurnum & horarium in dimidiata
ratione distantiarum respectivè, ideoque datur.

Lemma V.

    _Invenire lineam curvam generis Parabolici, quæ per data quotcunque
    puncta transibit._

Sunto puncta illa A, B, C, D, E, F, &c. & ab iisdem ad rectam quamvis
positione datam HN demitte perpendicula quotcunque AH, BI, CK, DL, EM, FN.

[Illustration]

_Cas. 1._ Si punctorum H, I, K, L, M, N æqualia sunt intervalla HI, IK, KL,
&c. collige perpendiculorum AH, BI, CK &c. differentias primas b, 2b, 3b,
4b, 5b, &c. secundas c, 2c, 3c, 4c, &c. tertias d, 2d, 3d, &c. id est, ita
ut sit HA - BI = b, BI- CK = 2b, CK - DL = 3b, DL + EM = 4b, - EM + FN =
5b, &c. dein b - 2b = c &c. & sic pergatur ad differentiam ultimam, quæ hic
est f. Deinde erecta quacunque perpendiculari RS, quæ fuerit ordinatim
applicata ad curvam quæsitam: ut inveniatur hujus longitudo, pone
intervalla HI, IK, KL, LM, &c. unitates esse, & dic AH = a, - HS = p, ½p in
- IS = q, 1/3q in + SK = r, ¼r in + SL = s, 1/5s in + SM = t; pergendo
videlicet ad usque penultimum perpendiculum ME, & præponendo signa negativa
terminis HS, IS, &c. qui jacent ad partes puncti S versus A, & signa
affirmativa terminis SK, SL, &c. qui jacent ad alteras partes puncti S. Et
signis probe observatis erit RS = a + bp + cq + dr + es + ft &c.

_Cas. 2._ Quod si punctorum H, I, K, L, &c. inæqualia sint intervalla HI,
IK, &c. collige perpendiculorum AH, BI, CK, &c. differentias primas per
intervalla perpendiculorum divisas b, 2b, 3b, 4b, 5b; secundas per
intervalla bina divisas c, 2c, 3c, 4c, &c. tertias per intervalla terna
divisas d, 2d, 3d, &c. quartas per intervalla quaterna divisas e, 2e, &c. &
sic deinceps; id est ita ut sit b = {AH - BI} ÷ HI, 2b = {BI - CK} ÷ IK, 3b
= {CK - DL} ÷ KL &c. dein c = {b - 2b} ÷ HK, 2c = {2b - 3b} ÷ IL, 3c = {3b
- 4b} ÷ KM &c. Postea d = {c - 2c} ÷ HL, 2d = {2c - 3c} ÷ IM &c. Inventis
differentiis, dic AH = a, - HS = p, p in - IS = q, q in + SK = r, r in + SL
= s, s in + SM = t; pergendo scilicet ad usque perpendiculum penultimum ME,
& erit ordinatim applicata RS = a + bp + cq + dr + es + ft, &c.

_Corol._ Hinc areæ curvarum omnium inveniri possunt quamproximè. Nam si
curvæ cujusvis quadrandæ inveniantur puncta aliquot, & Parabola per eadem
duci intelligatur: erit area Parabolæ hujus eadem quam proximè cum area
curvæ illius quadrandæ. Potest autem Parabola per Methodos notissimas
semper quadrari Geometricè.

Lemma VI.

    _Ex observatis aliquot locis Cometæ invenire locum ejus ad tempus
    quodvis intermedium datum._

Designent HI, IK, KL, LM tempora inter observationes, (_in Fig. præced._)
HA, IB, KC, LD, ME, observatas quinque longitudines Cometæ, HS tempus datum
inter observationem primam & longitudinem quæsitam. Et si per puncta A, B,
C, D, E duci intelligatur curva regularis ABCDE; & per Lemma superius
inveniatur ejus ordinatim applicata RS, erit RS longitudo quæsita.

Eadem methodo ex observatis quinque latitudinibus invenitur latitudo ad
tempus datum.

Si longitudinum observatarum parvæ sint differentiæ, puta graduum tantum 4
vel 5; suffecerint observationes tres vel quatuor ad inveniendam
longitudinem & latitudinem novam. Sin majores sint differentiæ, puta
graduum 10 vel 20, debebunt observationes quinque adhiberi.

Lemma VII.

[Illustration]

    _Per datum punctum P ducere rectam lineam BC, cujus partes PB, PC,
    rectis duabus positione datis AB, AC abscissæ, datam habeant rationem
    ad invicem._

A puncto illo P ad rectarum alterutram AB ducatur recta quævis PD, &
producatur eadem versus rectam alteram AC usque ad E, ut sit PE ad PD in
data illa ratione. Ipsi AD parallela sit EC; & si agatur CPB, erit PC ad PB
ut PE ad PD.   _Q. E. F._

Lemma VIII.

    _Sit ABC Parabola umbilicum habens S. Chordâ AC bisectâ in I
    abscindatur segmentum ABCI, cujus diameter sit I[mu] & vertex [mu]. In
    I[mu] productâ capiatur [mu]O æqualis dimidio ipsius I[mu]. Jungatur
    OS, & producatur ea ad [xi], ut sit S[xi] æqualis 2SO. Et si Cometa B
    moveatur in arcu CBA, & agatur [xi]B secans AC in E: dico quod punctum
    E abscindet de chorda AC segmentum AE tempori proportionale
    quamproximè._

[Illustration]

Jungatur enim EO secans arcum Parabolicum ABC in Y, & erit area curvilinea
AEY ad aream curvilineam ACY ut AE ad AC quamproximè. Ideoque cum
triangulum ASE sit ad triangulum ASC in eadem ratione, erit area tota ASEY
ad aream totam ASCY ut AE ad AC quamproximè. Cum autem [xi]O sit ad SO ut 3
ad 1 & EO ad YO prope in eadem ratione, erit SY ipsi EB parallela
quamproximè, & propterea triangulum SEB, triangulo YEB quamproximè æquale.
Unde si ad aream ASEY addatur triangulum EYB, & de summa auferatur
triangulum SEB, manebit area ASBY areæ ASEY æqualis quamproximè, atque adeo
ad aream ASCY ut AE ad AC. Sed area ASBY est ad aream ASCY ut tempus
descripti arcus AB ad tempus descripti arcus totius. Ideoque AE est ad AC
in ratione temporum quamproximè.   _Q. E. D._

Lemma IX.

    _Rectæ I[mu] & [mu]M & longitudo AIC ÷ 4S[mu] æquantur inter se. Nam
    4S[mu] est latus rectum Parabolæ pertinens ad verticem B._

Lemma X.

    _Si producatur S[mu] ad N & P, ut [mu]N sit pars tertia ipsius [mu]I, &
    SP sit ad SN ut SN ad S[mu]. Cometa quo tempore describit arcum A[mu]C,
    si progrederetur ea semper cum velocitate quam habet in altitudine ipsi
    SP æquali, describeret longitudinem æqualem chordæ AC._

Nam si velocitate quam habet in [mu], eodem tempore progrediatur
uniformiter in recta quæ Parabolam tangit in [mu]; area quam Radio ad
punctum S ducto describeret, æqualis esset areæ Parabolicæ ASC[mu]. Ideoque
contentum sub longitudine in Tangente descripta & longitudine S[mu], esset
ad contentum sub longitudinibus AC & SM, ut area ASC[mu] ad triangulum
ASCM, id est ut SN ad SM. Quare AC est ad longitudinem in tangente
descriptam ut S[mu] ad SN. Cum autem velocitas Cometæ in altitudine SP sit
ad velocitatem in altitudine S[mu] in dimidiata ratione SP ad S[mu]
inversè, id est in ratione S[mu] ad SN, longitudo hac velocitate eodem
tempore descripta, erit ad longitudinem in Tangente descriptam ut S[mu] ad
SN. Igitur AC & longitudo hac nova velocitate descripta, cum sint ad
longitudinem in Tangente descriptam in eadem ratione, æquantur inter se.
_Q. E. D._

_Corol._ Cometa igitur ea cum velocitate, quam habet in altitudine S[mu] +
2/3I[mu], eodem tempore describeret chordam AC quamproximè.

Lemma XI.

    _Si Cometa motu omni privatus de altitudine SN seu S[mu] + 1/3I[mu]
    demitteretur, ut caderet in Solem, & ea semper vi uniformiter
    continuata urgeretur in Solem qua urgetur sub initio; idem tempore in
    orbe suo describat arcum AC, descensu suo describeret spatium
    longitudini I[mu] æquale._

Nam Cometa quo tempore describat arcum Parabolicum AC, eodem tempore ea cum
velocitate quam habet in altitudine SP (per Lemma novissimum) describet
chordam AC, adeoque eodem tempore in circulo cujus semidiameter esset SP
revolvendo, describeret arcum cujus longitudo esset ad arcus Parabolici
chordam AC in dimidiata ratione unius ad duo. Et propterea eo cum pondere
quod habet in Solem in altitudine SP, cadendo de altitudine illa in Solem,
describeret eodem tempore (per Scholium Prop. IV. Lib. I.) spatium æquale
quadrato semissis chordæ illius applicato ad quadruplum altitudinis SP, id
est spatium AIq. ÷ 4SP. Unde cum pondus Cometæ in Solem in altitudine SN
sit ad ipsius pondus in Solem in altitudine SP, ut SP ad S[mu]: Cometa
pondere quod habet in altitudine SN eodem tempore, in Solem cadendo,
describet spatium AIq. ÷ 4S[mu], id est spatium longitudini I[mu] vel M[mu]
æquale.   _Q. E. D._

Prop. XLI. Prob. XX.

    _Cometæ in Parabola moventis Trajectoriam ex datis tribus
    observationibus determinare._

Problema hocce longe difficillimum multimodè aggressus, composui Problemata
quædam in Libro primo quæ ad ejus solutionem spectant. Postea solutionem
sequentem paulò simpliciorem excogitavi.

Seligantur tres observationes æqualibus temporum intervallis ab invicem
quamproximè distantes. Sit autem temporis intervallum illud ubi Cometa
tardius movetur paulo majus altero, ita videlicet ut temporum differentia
sit ad summam temporum ut summa temporum ad dies plus minus sexcentos. Si
tales observationes non præsto sint, inveniendus est novus Cometæ locus per
Lemma sextum.

[Illustration]

Designent S Solem, T, t, [tau] tria loca Terræ in orbe magno, TA, tB,
[tau]C observatas tres longitudines Cometæ, V tempus inter observationem
primam & secundam, W tempus inter secundam ac tertiam, X longitudinem quam
Cometa toto illo tempore ea cum velocitate quam habet in mediocri Telluris
à Sole distantia, describere posset, & tV perpendiculum in chordam T[tau].
In longitudine media tB sumatur utcunque punctum B, & inde versus Solem S
ducatur linea BE, quæ sit ad Sagittam tV, ut contentum sub SB & St quadrato
ad cubum hypotenusæ trianguli rectanguli, cujus latera sunt SB & tangens
latitudinis Cometæ in observatione secunda ad radium tB. Et per punctum E
agatur recta AEC, cujus partes AE, EC ad rectas TA & [tau]C terminatæ, sint
ad invicem ut tempora V & W: Tum per puncta A, B, C, duc circumferentiam
circuli, eamque biseca in i, ut & chordam AC in I. Age occultam Si secantem
AC in [lambda], & comple parallelogrammum iI[lambda][mu]. Cape I[sigma]
æqualem 3I[lambda], & per Solem S age occultam [sigma][xi] æqualem
3S[sigma] + 3i[lambda]. Et deletis jam literis A, E, C, I, à puncto B
versus punctum [xi] duc occultam novam BE, quæ sit ad priorem BE in
duplicata ratione distantiæ BS ad quantitatem S[mu] + 1/3i[lambda]. Et per
punctum E iterum duc rectam AEC eadem lege ac prius, id est, ita ut ejus
partes AE & EC sint ad invicem ut tempora inter observationes, V & W.

Ad AC bisectam in I erigantur perpendicula AM, CN, IO, quarum AM & CN sint
tangentes latitudinum in observatione prima ac tertia ad radios TA &
[tau][alpha]. Jungatur MN secans IO in O. Constituatur rectangulum
iI[lambda][mu] ut prius. In IA producta capiatur ID æqualis S[mu] +
2/3i[lambda], & agatur occulta OD. Deinde in MN versus N capiatur MP, quæ
sit ad longitudinem supra inventam X in dimidiata ratione mediocris
distantiæ Telluris à Sole (seu semidiametri orbis magni) ad distantiam OD.
Et in AC capiatur CG ipsi NP æqualis, ita ut puncta G & P ad easdem partes
rectæ NC jaceant.

Eadem methodo qua puncta E, A, C, G, ex assumpto puncto B inventa sunt,
inveniantur ex assumptis utcunque punctis aliis b & [beta] puncta nova e,
a, c, g, & [epsilon], [alpha], [kappa], [gamma]. Deinde si per G, g,
[gamma] ducatur circumferentia circuli Gg[gamma] secans rectam [tau]C in Z:
erit Z locus Cometæ in plano Eclipticæ. Et si in AC, ac, [alpha][kappa]
capiantur AF, af, [alpha][phi] ipsis CG, cg, [kappa][gamma] respectivè
æquales, & per puncta F, f, [phi] ducatur circumferentia circuli Ff[phi]
secans rectam AT in X; erit punctum X alius Cometæ locus in plano
Eclipticæ. Ad puncta X & Z erigantur tangentes latitudinum Cometæ ad radios
TX & [tau]Z; & habebuntur loca duo Cometæ in orbe proprio. Denique (per
Prop. XIX. Lib. I.) umbilico S, per loca illa duo describatur Parabola, &
hæc erit Trajectoria Cometæ.   _Q. E. I._

Constructionis hujus demonstratio ex Lemmatibus consequitur: quippe cum
recta AC secetur in E in ratione temporum, per Lemma VIII: & BE per Lem.
XI. sit pars rectæ BS in plano Eclipticæ arcui ABC & chordæ AEG interjecta;
& MP (per Lem. VIII.) longitudo sit chordæ arcus, quem Cometa in orbe
proprio inter observationem primam ac tertiam describere debet, ideoque
ipsi MN æqualis fuerit, si modò B sit verus Cometæ locus in plano
Eclipticæ.

Cæterum puncta B, b, [beta] non quælibet, sed vero proxima eligere
convenit. Si angulus AQt in quo vestigium orbis in plano Eclipticæ
descriptum secabit rectam tB præterpropter innotescat, in angulo illo
ducenda erit recta occulta AC, quæ sit ad 4/3Tt in dimidiata ratione St ad
SQ. Et agendo rectam SEB cujus pars EB æquetur longitudini Vt,
determinabitur punctum B quod prima vice usurpare licet. Tum rectâ AC
deletâ & secundum præcedentem constructionem iterum ductâ, & inventâ
insuper longitudine MP; in tB capiatur punctum b, ea lege, ut si TA, TC se
mutuò secuerint in Y, sit distantia Yb ad distantiam YB in ratione
composita ex ratione MN ad MP & ratione dimidiata SB ad Sb. Et eadem
methodo inveniendum erit punctum tertium [beta]; si modò operationem tertiò
repetere lubet. Sed hac methodo operationes duæ ut plurimum suffecerint.
Nam si distantia Bb perexigua obvenerit, postquam inventa sunt puncta F, f
& G, g, actæ rectæ Ff & Gg, secabunt TA & [tau]C in punctis quæsitis X & Z.

_Exemplum._

Proponatur Cometa anni 1680. Hujus motum à _Flamstedio_ observatum Tabula
sequens exhibet.

             | Tem.   |Temp.    |               |              |  Lat.   |
             | appar. |ver[=u]  |  Long. Solis  | Long. Cometæ | Cometæ  |
             +--------+---------+---------------+--------------+---------+
  1680     12|  4.46  | 4.46.00 |[Cap.] 1.53. 2 |[Cap.] 6.33. 0|  8.26. 0|
  December 21|6.32-1/2| 6.36.59 |      11. 8.10 |[Aqu.] 5. 7.38| 21.45.30|
           24|  6.12  | 6.17.52 |      14.10.49 |      18.49.10| 25.23.24|
           26|  5.14  | 5.20.44 |      16.10.38 |      28.24. 6| 27.00.57|
           29|  7.55  | 8.03. 2 |      19.20.56 |[Psc.]13.11.45| 28.10.05|
           30|  8. 2  | 8.10.26 |      20.22.20 |      17.37. 5| 28.11.12|
  1681      5|  5.51  | 6. 1.38 |      26.23.19 |[Ari.] 8.49.10| 26.15.26|
  January   9|  6.49  | 7. 0.53 |[Aqu.] 0.29.54 |      18.43.18| 24.12.42|
           10|  5.54  | 6. 6.10 |       1.28.34 |      20.40.57| 23.44.00|
           13|  6.56  | 7. 8.55 |       4.34. 6 |      25.59.34| 22.17.36|
           25|  7.44  | 7.58.42 |      16.45.58 |[Tau.] 9.55.48| 17.56.54|
           30|  8.07  | 8.21.53 |      21.50. 9 |      13.19.36| 16.40.57|
  February  2|  6.20  | 6.34.51 |      24.47. 4 |      15.13.48| 16.02.02|
            5|  6.50  | 7. 4.41 |      27.49.51 |      16.59.52| 15.27.23|
             +--------+---------+---------------+--------------+---------+

In his observationibus _Flamstedius_ eâ usus est diligentiâ, ut postquam
bis observasset distantiam Cometæ à Stella aliqua fixa, deinde etiam
distantiam bis ab alia stella fixa, rediret ad stellam priorem & distantiam
Cometæ ab eadem iterum observaret, idque bis, ac deinde ex distantiæ illius
incremento vel decremento tempori proportionali colligeret distantiam
tempore intermedio, quando distantia à stella altera observabatur. Ex
hujusmodi observationibus loca Cometæ festinanter computata _Flamstedius_
primò cum amicis communicavit, & postea easdem ad examen revocatas calculo
diligentiore correxit. Nos loca correcta hic descripsimus.

His adde observationes quasdam è nostris.

           | Temp.  |                 |           |
           | appar. |  Cometæ Longit. |Com. Lat.  |
           +--------+-----------------+-----------+
  Febru. 25|  8h.30'|[Tau.] 26.19'. 2"| 12.46-7/8 |
         27|  8 .15 |       27. 4 .28 | 12.36     |
  Mart.   1| 11 . 0 |       27.53 . 8 | 12.24-3/4 |
          2|  8 . 0 |       28.12 .29 | 12.19-1/2 |
          5| 11 .30 |       29.20 .51 | 12. 2-2/3 |
          9|  8 .30 |[Gem.]  0.43 . 2 | 11.44-3/5 |

Hæ observationes Telescopio septupedali, & Micrometro filisque in foco
Telescopii locatis paractæ sunt: quibus instrumentis & positiones fixarum
inter se & positiones Cometæ ad fixas determinavimus. Designet A stellam in
sinistro calcaneo Persei (_Bayero_ [omicron]) B stellam sequentem in
sinistro pede (_Bayero_ [zeta]) & C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, M, N stellas
alias minores in eodem pede. Sintque P, Q, R, S, T loca Cometæ in
observationibus supra descriptis: & existente distantiâ AB partium 80-7/12,
erat AC partium 52¼, BC 58-5/6, AD 57-5/12, BD 82-6/11, CD 23-2/3, AE
29-4/7, CE 57½, DE 49-11/12, AK 38-2/3, BK 43, CK 31-5/9, FK 29, FB 23, FC
36¼, AH 18-6/7, DH 53-5/11, BN 46-5/12, CN 31-1/3, BL 45-5/12, NL 31-5/7.
LM erat ad LB ut 2 ad 9 & producta transibat per stellam H. His
determinabantur positiones fixarum inter se.

[Illustration]

Die Veneris _Feb. 25._ St. vet. Hor. 8½ P.M. Cometæ in p existentis
distantia à stella E erat major quàm 3/13 AE, minor quàm 1/5 AE, adeoque
æqualis 3/14 AE proximè; & angulus ApE nonnihil obtusus erat, sed fere
rectus. Nempe si demitteretur ad pE perpendiculum ab A, distantia Cometæ à
perpendiculo illo erat 1/5 pE.

Eadem nocte, horâ 9½, Cometæ in P existentis distantia à stella E erat
major quàm {1 ÷ 4½} AE, minor quàm {1 ÷ 5¼} AE, adeoque æqualis {1 ÷ 4-7/8}
AE, seu 8/39 AE quamproximè. A perpendiculo autem à Stella A ad rectam PE
demisso distantia Cometæ erat 4/5 PE.

Die [Mar]^{tis}, _Mart. 1_, hor. 11. P.M. Cometa in R existens, stellis K &
C accuratè interjacebat, & rectæ CRK pars CR paulo major erat quàm 1/3 CK,
& paulo minor quam 1/3 CK + 1/8 CR, adeoque æqualis 1/3 CK + 1/16 CR seu
16/45 CK.

[Illustration]

Die [Mercur]^{ii}, _Mart. 2._ hor. 8. P.M. Cometæ existentis in S,
distantia à stella C erat 4/9 FC quamproximè. Distantia stellæ F à recta CS
producta erat 1/24 FC; & distantia stellæ B ab eadem recta erat quintuplo
major quàm distantia stellæ F. Item recta NS producta transibat inter
stellas H & I, quintuplo vel sextuplo propior existens stellæ H quàm stellæ
I.

Die [Satur]^{ni}, _Mart. 5._ hor. 11½. P.M. Cometa existente in T, recta MT
æqualis erat ½ML, & recta LT producta transibat inter B & F, quadruplo vel
quintuplo propior F quàm B, auferens à BF quintam vel sextam ejus partem
versus F. Et MT producta transibat extra spatium BF ad partes stellæ B,
quadruplo propior existens stellæ B quam stellæ F. Erat M stella perexigua
quæ per Telescopium videri vix potuit, & L stella major quasi magnitudinis
octavæ.

Ex hujusmodi observationibus per constructiones figurarum & computationes
(posito quod stellarum A & B distantia esset 2 gr. 6-4/5, & stellæ A
longitudo [Tauri] 26 gr. 41'. 48" & latitudo borealis 12 gr. 8'½, stellæque
B longitudo [Tauri] 28 gr. 40'. 16". & latitudo borealis 11 gr. 17-1/5;
quemadmodum à _Flamstedio_ observatas accepi) derivabam longitudines &
latitudines Cometæ. Micrometro parum affabre constructâ usus sum, sed
Longitudinum tamen & Latitudinum errores (quatenus ab observationibus
nostris oriantur) dimidium minuti unius primi vix superant, præterquam in
observatione ultimâ _Mart. 9._ ubi positiones fixarum ad stellas A & B
minus accuratè determinare potui. _Cassinus_ qui Cometam eodem tempore
observavit, se declinationem ejus tanquam invariatam manentem parum
diligenter definivisse fassus est. Nam Cometa (juxta observationes nostras)
in fine motus sui notabiliter deflectere cæpit boream versus, à parallelo
quem in fine Mensis _Februarii_ tenuerat.

Jam ad Orbem Cometæ determinandum; selegi ex observationibus hactenus
descriptis tres, quas _Flamstedius_ habuit _Dec. 21_, _Jan. 5_, & _Jan.
25_. Ex his inveni St partium 9842,1 & Vt partium 455, quales 10000 sunt
semidiameter orbis magni. Tum ad operationem primam assumendo tB partium
5657, inveni SB 9747, BE prima vice 412, S[mu] 9503, i[lambda] = 413: BE
secunda vice 421, OD 10186, X 8528,4, MP 8450, MN 8475, NP - 25. Unde ad
operationem secundam collegi distantiam tb 5640. Et per hanc operationem
inveni tandem distantias TX 4775 & [tau]Z 11322. Ex quibus orbem definiendo
inveni Nodos ejus in [Cancris] & [Capricorni] 1 gr. 53'; Inclinationem
plani ejus ad planum Eclipticæ 61 gr. 20-1/3; verticem ejus (seu perihelium
Cometæ) in [Sagittarii] 27 gr. 43' cum latitudine australi 7 gr. 34'; &
ejus latus rectum 236,8, areamq; radio ad Solem ducto singulis diebus
descriptam 93585; Cometam verò _Decemb._ 8 d. 0 h. 4'. P.M. in vertice
orbis seu perihelio fuisse. Hæc omnia per scalam partium æqualium & chordas
angulorum ex Tabula Sinuum naturalium collectas determinavi graphicè;
construendo Schema satis amplum, in quo videlicet semidiameter orbis magni
(partium 10000) æqualis esset digitis 16-1/3 pedis Anglicani.

Tandem ut constaret an Cometa in Orbe sic invento verè moveretur, collegi
per operationes partim Arithmeticas partim Graphicas, loca Cometæ in hoc
orbe ad observationum quarundam tempora: uti in Tabula sequente videre
licet.

                                     COMETÆ
         |Distant.|         |         |         |          |     |       |
         |Cometæ  |  Lon.   |  Lat.   |Long.Obs.|Lat. Obs. |Diff.|Differ.|
         | à Sole |Collect. |Collect. |         |          |Long.|Lat.   |
         +--------+---------+---------+---------+----------+-----+-------+
  Decemb.|        | [Cap.]  |         | [Cap.]  |          |     |       |
       12|   2792 | 6.32    | 8.18-1/2| 6.33    | 8.26     | -2  | -7-1/2|
         |        | [Psc.]  |         | [Psc.]  |          |     |       |
       29|   8403 |13.13-2/3|28. 0    |13.11-3/4|28.10-1/12| +2  |-10-1/2|
         |        | [Tau.]  |         | [Tau.]  |          |     |       |
  Febr. 5|  16669 |17. 0    |15.29-2/3|16.59-7/8|15.27-2/5 |  0  | +2-1/5|
         |        | [Tau.]  |         | [Tau.]  |          |     |       |
  Mar.  5|  21737 |29.19-3/4|12. 4    |29.20-6/7|12. 2-2/3 | -1  | +1-1/3|

Præterea cum _Cl. Flamstedius_ Cometam, qui Mense _Novembri_ apparuerat,
eundem esse cum Cometa mensium subsequentium, literis ad me datis aliquando
disputaret, & Trajectoriam quamdam ab orbe hocce Parabolico non longe
aberrantem delinearet, visum est loca Cometæ in hoc orbe Mense _Novembri_
computare, & cum Observationis conferre. Observationes ita se habent.

_Nov. 17._ St. Vet. _Ponthæus_ & alii hora sexta matutina _Romæ_, (id est
hora 5. 10' _Londini_) Cometam observarunt in [Libræ] 8 gr. 30' cum
latitudine Australi 0 gr. 40'. Extant autem eorum observationes in tractatu
quem _Ponthæus_ de hoc Cometa in lucem edidit. Eadem horâ _Galletius_ etiam
_Romæ_, Cometam vidit in [Libræ] 8 gr. sine Latitudine.

_Nov. 18._ _Ponthæus_ & Socii horâ matutinâ 6, 30' _Romæ_ (_i. e._ hor. 5.
40' _Londini_) Cometam viderunt in [Libræ] 13½ cum Lat. Austr. 1 gr. 20'.
Eodem die _R. P. Ango_ in Academia _Flechensi_ apud _Gallos_, horâ quintâ
matutinâ, Cometam vidit in medio Stellarum duarum parvarum, quarum una
media est trium in recta linea in Virginis Australi manu, & altera est
extrema alæ. Unde Cometa tunc fuit in [Libræ] 12 gr. 46' cum Lat. Austr.
50'. Eodem die _Bostoniæ_ in _Nova Anglia_ in Lat. 42-1/3, horâ quintâ
matutinâ (id est _Londini_ hora Mat. 9-2/3) Cometa visus est in [Libræ] 14
circiter, cum Lat. Austr. 1 gr. 30'; uti à _Cl. Halleio_ accepi.

_Nov. 19._ hora Mat. 4½ _Cantabrigiæ_, Cometa (observante juvene quodam)
distabat à Spica [Virginis] quasi 2 gr. Boreazephyrum versus. Eodem die
hor. 5. Mat. _Bostoniæ_ in _Nova-Anglia_ Cometa distabat à Spica [Virginis]
gradu uno, differentiâ latitudinum existente 40', atque adeo differentia
Long. 44' circiter. Unde Cometa erat in [Libræ] 18 gr. 40' cum Lat. Austr.
1 gr. 19'. Eodem die D. _Arthurus Storer_ ad fluvium _Patuxent_ prope
_Hunting-Creek_ in _Mary-Land_, in Confinio _Virginiæ_ in Lat. 38½ gr. horâ
quintâ matutinâ (id est horâ 10^a _Londini_) Cometam vidit supra Spicam
[Virginis], & cum Spica propemodum conjunctum, existente distantia inter
eosdem quasi ¾ gr. Observator idem, eadem horà diei sequentis, Cometam
vidit quasi 2 gr. inferiorem Spicâ. Congruent hæ observationes cum
observationibus in _Nova Anglia_ factis, si modò distantiæ (pro motu diurno
Cometæ) nonnihil augeantur, ita ut Cometa die priore superior esset Spica
[Virginis] altitudine 52' circiter, ac die posteriore inferior eadem stellâ
altitudine perpendiculari 2 gr. 40'.

_Nov. 20._ D. _Montenarus_ Astronomiæ Professor _Paduensis_, hora sexta
Matutina, _Venetiis_ (id est hora 5. 10' _Londini_) Cometam vidit in
[Libræ] 23 gr. cum Lat. Austr. 1 gr. 30'. Eodem die _Bostoniæ_ distabat
Cometa à Spica [Virginis], 4 gr. longitudinis in orientem, adeoque erat in
[Libræ] 23 gr. 24 circiter.

_Nov. 21._ _Ponthæus_ & Socii hor. mat. 7¼ Cometam observarunt in [Libræ]
27 gr. 50' cum Latitudine Australi 1 gr. 16'. _Ango_ horâ quintâ mat. in
[Libræ] 27 gr. 45'. _Montenarus_ in [Libræ] 27 gr. 51'. Eodem die in Insulâ
_Jamaicâ_ visus est prope principium Scorpii, eandemque circiter
latitudinem habuit cum Spica Virginis, id est 1 gr. 59'.

_Novem. 22._ Visus est à _Montenaro_ in [Scorpii] 2°. 33'. _Bostoniæ_ autem
in _Novâ Angliâ_ apparuit in [Scorpii] 3 gr. circiter, eadem fere cum
latitudine ac prius.

Deinde visus est à _Montenaro_ _Novem. 24._ in [Scorpii] 12 gr. 52'. &
_Nov. 25._ in [Scorpii] 17 gr. 45'. Latitudinem _Galletius_ jam ponit 2 gr.
Eandem _Ponthæus_ & _Galletius_ decrevisse, _Montenarus_ & _Ango_ semper
crevisse testantur. Crassæ sunt horum omnium observationes, sed eæ
_Montenari_, _Angonis_ & observatoris in _Nova-Anglia_ præferendæ videntur.
Ex omnibus autem inter se collatis, & ad meridianum _Londini_, hora mat. 5.
10' reductis, colligo Cometam hujusmodi cursum quamproximè descripsisse.

          |   Long. Com.   | Latit. Com. |
          +----------------+-------------+
  Nov. 17 |[Libræ]     8.0 | 0.45 Austr. |
       18 |          12.52 | 1. 2        |
       19 |          17.48 | 1.18        |
       20 |          22.45 | 1.32        |
       21 |          27.46 | 1.44        |
       22 |[Scorpii]  2.48 | 1.55        |
       23 |           7.50 | 2. 4        |
       24 |          12.52 | 2.12        |
       25 |          17.45 | 2.18        |

Loca autem Cometæ iisdem horis in orbe Parabolico inventa ita se habent.

          |  Comet. Lon.   | Com. Lat. |
          +----------------+-----------+
  Nov. 17 |[Libræ]    8. 3 |   0.23 A  |
       21 |[Libræ]   28. 0 |   1.22 A  |
       25 |[Scorpii] 18.17 |   2. 6 A  |

Congruunt igitur observationes tam mense _Novembri_, quam mensibus tribus
subsequentibus cum motu Cometæ circa Solem in Trajectoriâ hacce Parabolicâ,
atque adeo hanc esse veram hujus Cometæ Trajectoriam confirmant. Nam
differentia inter loca observata & loca computata tam ex erroribus
observationum quam ex erroribus operationum Graphicarum in Orbe definiendo
admissis, facilè oriri potuere.

Cæterum Trajectoriam quam Cometa descripsit, & caudam veram quam singulis
in locis projecit, visum est annexo schemate in plano Trajectoriæ opticè
delineatas exhibere: observationibus sequentibus in cauda definienda
adhibitis.

_Nov. 17._ Cauda gradus amplius quindecim longa _Ponthæo_ apparuit. _Nov.
18._ cauda 30 gr. longa, Solique directe opposita in _Nova Anglia_
cernebatur, & protendebatur usque ad stellam [Martem], qui tunc erat in
[Virginis] 9 gr. 54'. _Nov. 19_ in _Mary-Land_ cauda visa fuit gradus 15
vel 20 longa. _Dec. 10._ cauda (observante _Flamstedio_) transibat per
medium distantiæ inter caudam serpentis Ophiuchi & stellam [delta] in
Aquilæ australi ala, & desinebat prope stellas A, [omega], b in Tabulis
_Bayeri_. Terminus igitur erat in [Capricorni] 19½ cum lat. bor. 34¼ gr.
circiter. _Dec. 11._ surgebat ad usque caput sagittæ (_Bayero_, [alpha],
[beta],) desinens in [Capricorni] 26 gr. 43' cum lat. bor. 38 gr. 34'.
_Dec. 12._ transibat per medium Sagittæ, nec longe ultra protendebatur,
desinens in [Aquarii] 4°, cum lat. bor. 42½ circiter. Intelligenda sunt hæc
de longitudine caudæ clarioris. Nam luce obscuriore, in coelo forsan magis
sereno, cauda _Dec. 12._ hora 5, 40' _Romæ_ (observante _Ponthæo_) supra
cygni Uropygium ad gr. 10. sese extulit; atque ab hac stella ejus latus ad
occasum & boream min. 45. destitit. Lata autem erat cauda his diebus gr. 3.
juxta terminum superiorem, ideoque medium ejus distabat à Stella illa 2 gr.
15' austrum versus, & terminus superior erat in [Piscium] 22 gr. cum lat.
bor. 61 gr. _Dec. 21._ surgebat fere ad cathedram _Cassiopeiæ_, æqualiter
distans à [beta] & _Schedir_, & distantiam ab utraque distantiæ earum ab
invicem æqualem habens, adeoque desinens in [Piscium] 24 gr. cum lat. 47½
gr. _Dec. 29._ tangebat _Scheat_ sitam ad sinistram, & intervallum
stellarum duarum in pede boreali _Andromedæ_ accuratè complebat, & longa
erat 54 gr. adeoque desinebat in [Tauri] 19 gr. cum lat. 35. gr. _Jan. 5._
tetigit stellam [pi] in pectore _Andromedæ_, ad latus suum dextrum &
stellam [mu] in ejus cingulo ad latus sinistrum; & (juxta observationes
nostras) longa erat 40 gr.; curva autem erat & convexo latere spectabat ad
austrum. Cum circulo per Solem & caput Cometæ transeunte angulum confecit
graduum 4 juxta caput Cometæ; at juxta terminum alterum inclinabatur ad
circulum illum in angulo 10 vel 11 grad. & chorda caudæ cum circulo illo
continebat angulum graduum octo. _Jan. 13._ Cauda luce satis sensibili
terminabatur inter _Alamech_ & _Algol_, & luce tenuissima desinebat è
regione stellæ [kappa] in latere _Persei_. Distantia termini caudæ à
circulo Solem & Cometam jungente erat 3 gr. 50', & inclinatio chordæ caudæ
ad circulum illum 8½ gr. _Jan. 25 & 26_ luce tenui micabat ad longitudinem
graduum 6 vel 7; & ubi coelum valde serenum erat, luce tenuissimâ &
ægerrimè sensibili attingebat longitudinem graduum duodecim & paulo ultra.
Dirigebatur autem ejus axis ad Lucidam in humero orientali Aurigæ accuratè,
adeoque declinabat ab oppositione Solis Boream versus in angulo graduum
decem. Denique _Feb. 10._ caudam oculis armatis aspexi gradus duos longam.
Nam lux prædicta tenuior per vitra non apparuit. _Ponthæus_ autem _Feb. 7._
se caudam ad longitudinem gr. 12. vidisse scribit.

Orbem jam descriptum spectanti & reliqua Cometæ hujus Phænomena in animo
revolventi haud difficulter constabit quod corpora Cometarum sunt solida,
compacta, fixa ac durabilia ad instar corporum Planetarum. Nam si nihil
aliud essent quàm vapores vel exhalationes Terræ, Solis & Planetarum,
Cometa hicce in transitu suo per viciniam Solis statim dissipari debuisset.
Est enim calor Solis ut radiorum densitas, hoc est reciprocè ut quadratum
distantiæ locorum à Sole. Ideoque cum distantia Cometæ à Sole _Dec. 8._ ubi
in Perihelio versabatur, esset ad distantiam Terræ à Sole ut 6 ad 1000
circiter, calor Solis apud Cometam eo tempore erat ad calorem Solis æstivi
apud nos ut 1000000 ad 36, seu 28000 ad 1. Sed calor aquæ ebullientis est
quasi triplo major quàm calor quem terra arida concipit ad æstivum Solem;
ut expertus sum: & calor ferri candentis (si rectè conjector) quasi triplo
vel quadruplo major quam calor aquæ ebullientis; adeoque calor quem terra
arida apud Cometam in perihelio versantem ex radiis Solaribus concipere
posset; quasi 2000 vicibus major quàm calor ferri candentis. Tanto autem
calore vapores & exhalationes, omnisque materia volatilis statim consumi ac
dissipari debuissent.

Cometa igitur in perihelio suo calorem immensum ad Solem concepit, &
calorem illum diutissimè conservare potest. Nam globus ferri candentis
digitum unum latus, calorem suum omnem spatio horæ unius in aere consistens
vix amitteret. Globus autem major calorem diutius conservaret in ratione
diametri, propterea quod superficies (ad cujus mensuram per contactum aeris
ambientis refrigeratur) in illa ratione minor est pro quantitate materiæ
suæ calidæ inclusæ. Ideoque globus ferri candentis huic Terræ æqualis, id
est pedes plus minus 40000000 latus, diebus totidem, & idcirco annis 50000,
vix refrigesceret. Suspicor tamen quod duratio Caloris ob causas latentes
augeatur in minore ratione quam ea diametri: & optarim rationem veram per
experimenta investigari.

Porrò notandum est quod Cometa Mense _Decembri_, ubi ad Solem modò
incaluerat, caudam emittebat longe majorem & splendidiorem quàm antea Mense
_Novembri_; ubi perihelium nondum attigerat. Et universaliter caudæ omnes
maximæ & fulgentissimæ è Cometis oriuntur, statim post transitum eorum per
regionem Solis. Conducit igitur calefactio Cometæ ad magnitudinem caudæ. Et
inde colligere videor quod cauda nihil aliud sit quam vapor longe
tenuissimus, quem caput seu Nucleus Cometæ per calorem suum emittit.

Cæterum de Cometarum caudis triplex est opinio, eas vel jubar esse Solis
per translucida Cometarum capita propagatum; vel oriri ex refractione lucis
in progressu ipsius à capite Cometæ in Terram: vel denique nubem esse seu
vaporem à capite Cometæ jugiter surgentem & abeuntem in partes à Sole
aversas. Opinio prima eorum est qui nondum imbuti sunt scientia rerum
opticarum. Nam jubar Solis in cubiculo tenebroso non cernitur nisi quatenus
lux reflectitur è pulverum & fumorum particulis per aerem semper
volitantibus: adeoque in aere fumis crassioribus infecto splendidius est, &
sensum fortius ferit; in aere clariore tenuius est & ægrius sentitur: in
coelis autem absque materia reflectente nullum esse potest. Lux non
cernitur quatenus in jubare est, sed quatenus inde reflectitur ad oculos
nostros. Nam visio non fit nisi per radios qui in oculos impingunt.
Requiritur igitur materia aliqua reflectens in regione Caudæ, ne coelum
totum luce Solis illustratum uniformiter splendeat. Opinio secunda multis
premitur difficultatibus. Caudæ nunquam variegantur coloribus: qui tamen
refractionum solent esse comites inseparabiles. Lux Fixarum & Planetarum
distinctè ad nos transmissa demonstrat medium coeleste nulla vi refractiva
pollere. Nam quod dicitur fixas ab _Ægyptiis_ comatas nonnunquam visas
fuisse, id quoniam rarissimè contingit, ascribendum est nubium refractioni
fortuitæ. Fixarum quoque radiatio & scintillatio ad refractiones tum
Oculorum tum aeris tremuli referendæ sunt: quippe quæ admotis oculo
Telescopiis evanescunt. Aeris & ascendentium vaporum tremore fit ut radii
facile de angusto pupilli spatio per vices detorqueantur, de latiore autem
vitri objectivi apertura neutiquam. Inde est quod scintillatio in priori
casu generetur, in posteriore autem cesset: & cessatio in posteriore casu
demonstrat regularem transmissionem lucis per coelos absque omni
refractione sensibili. Nequis contendat quod caudæ non soleant videri in
Cometis cum eorum lux non est satis fortis, quia tunc radii secundarii non
habent satis virium ad oculos movendos, & propterea caudas fixarum non
cerni: sciendum est quod lux fixarum plus centum vicibus augeri potest
mediantibus Telescopiis, nec tamen caudæ cernuntur. Planetarum quoque lux
copiosior est, caudæ verò nullæ: Cometæ autem sæpe caudatissimi sunt, ubi
capitum lux tenuis est & valde obtusa: sic enim Cometa Anni 1680, Mense
_Decembri_, quo tempore caput luce sua vix æquabat stellas secundæ
magnitudinis, caudam emittebat splendore notabili usque ad gradus 40, 50,
60 longitudinis & ultra: postea _Jan. 27 & 28_ caput apparebat ut stella
septimæ tantum magnitudinis, cauda verò luce quidem pertenui sed satis
sensibili longa erat 6 vel 7 gradus, & luce obscurissima, quæ cerni vix
posset, porrigebatur ad gradum usque duodecimum vel paulo ultra: ut supra
dictum est. Sed & _Feb. 9. & 10_ ubi caput nudis oculis videri desierat,
caudam gradus duos longam per Telescopium contemplatus sum. Porro si cauda
oriretur ex refractione materiæ coelestis, & pro figura coelorum
deflecteretur de Solis oppositione, deberet deflexio illa in iisdem coeli
regionibus in eandem semper partem fieri. Atqui Cometa Anni 1680 _Decemb.
28_ hora 8½ P.M. _Londini_, versabatur in [Piscium] 8 gr. 41 cum latitudine
boreali 28 gr. 6', Sole existente in [Capricorni] 18 gr. 26'. Et Cometa
Anni 1577 _Dec. 29._ versabatur in [Piscium] 8 gr. 41' cum latitudine
boreali 28 gr. 40'. Sole etiam existente in [Capricorni] 18 gr. 26'
circiter. Utroque in casu Terra versabatur in eodem loco & Cometa apparebat
in eadem coeli parte: in priori tamen casu cauda Cometæ (ex meis & aliorum
observationibus) declinabat angulo graduum 4½ ab oppositione Solis
Aquilonem versus; in posteriore verò (ex Observationibus _Tychonis_)
declinatio erat graduum 21 in austrum. Igitur repudiata coelorum
refractione, superest ut Phænomena Caudarum ex materia aliqua reflectente
deriventur.

Caudas autem à capitibus oriri & in regiones à Sole aversas ascendere
confirmatur ex legibus quas observant. Ut quod in planis orbium Cometarum
per Solem transeuntibus jacentes, deviant ab oppositione Solis in eas
semper partes quas capita in orbibus illis progredientia relinquunt. Quod
spectatori in his planis constituto apparent in partibus à Sole directè
aversis; digrediente autem spectatore de his planis, deviatio paulatim
sentitur, & indies apparet major. Quod deviatio cæteris paribus minor est
ubi cauda obliquior est ad orbem Cometæ, ut & ubi caput Cometæ ad Solem
propius accedit; præsertim si spectetur deviationis angulus juxta caput
Cometæ. Præterea quod caudæ non deviantes apparent rectæ, deviantes autem
incurvantur. Quod curvatura major est ubi major est deviatio, & magis
sensibilis ubi cauda cæteris paribus longior est: nam in brevioribus
curvatura ægre animadvertitur. Quod deviationis angulus minor est juxta
caput Cometæ, major juxta caudæ extremitatem alteram, atque adeò quod cauda
convexo sui latere partes respicit à quibus fit deviatio, quæque in rectâ
sunt lineâ à Sole per caput Cometæ in infinitum ductâ. Et quod caudæ quæ
prolixiores sunt & latiores, & luce vegetiore micant, sint ad latera
convexa paulò splendidiores & limite minus indistincto terminatæ quam ad
concava. Pendent igitur Phænomena caudæ à motu capitis, non autem à regione
coeli in qua caput conspicitur; & propterea non fiunt per refractionem
coelorum, sed à capite suppeditante materiam oriuntur. Etenim ut in aere
nostro fumus corporis cujusvis igniti petit superiora, idque vel
perpendiculariter si corpus quiescat, vel obliquè si corpus moveatur in
latus; ita in coelis ubi corpora gravitant in Solem, fumi & vapores
ascendere debent à Sole (uti jam dictum est) & superiora vel rectâ petere,
si corpus fumans quiescit; vel obliquè, si corpus progrediendo loca semper
deserit à quibus superiores vaporis partes ascenderant. Et obliquitas ista
minor erit ubi ascensus vaporis velocior est: nimirum in vicinia Solis &
juxta corpus fumans. Ex obliquitatis autem diversitate incurvabitur vaporis
columna: & quia vapor in columnæ latere præcedente paulo recentior est,
ideo etiam is ibidem aliquanto densior erit, lucemque propterea copiosius
reflectet, & limite minus indistincto terminabitur. De caudarum
agitationibus subitaneis & incertis, deque earum figuris irregularibus,
quas nonnulli quandoque describunt, hic nihil adjicio; propterea quod vel à
mutationibus aeris nostri, & motibus nubium caudas aliqua ex parte
obscurantium oriantur; vel forte à partibus Viæ Lacteæ, quæ cum caudis
prætereuntibus confundi possint, ac tanquam earum partes spectari.

Vapores autem, qui spatiis tam immensis implendis sufficiant, ex Cometarum
Atmosphæris oriri posse, intelligetur ex raritate aeris nostri. Nam aer
juxta superficiem Terræ spatium occupat quasi 850 vicibus majus quam aqua
ejusdem ponderis, ideoque aeris columna Cylindrica pedes 850 alta ejusdem
est ponderis cum aquæ columna pedali latitudinis ejusdem. Columna autem
aeris ad summitatem Atmosphæræ assurgens æquat pondere suo columnam aquæ
pedes 33 altam circiter; & propterea si columnæ totius aereæ pars inferior
pedum 850 altitudinis dematur, pars reliqua superior æquabit pondere suo
columnam aquæ altam pedes 32. Inde verò (ex Hypothesi multis experimentis
confirmata, quod compresso aeris sit ut pondus Atmosphæræ incumbentis,
quodque gravitas sit reciproce ut quadratum distantiæ locorum à centro
Terræ) computationem per Corol. Prop. XXII. Lib. II. ineundo, inveni quod
aer, si ascendatur à superficie Terræ ad altitudinem semidiametri unius
terrestris, rarior sit quàm apud nos in ratione longe majori, quàm spatii
omnis infra orbem Saturni ad globum diametro digiti unius descriptum.
Ideoque globus aeris nostri digitum unum latus, ea cum raritate quam
haberet in altitudine semidiametri unius terrestris, impleret omnes
Planetarum regiones ad usque sphæram Saturni & longe ultra. Proinde cum aer
adhuc altior in immensum rarescat; & coma seu Atmosphæra Cometæ, ascendendo
ab illius centro, quasi decuplo altior sit quàm superficies nuclei, deinde
cauda adhuc altius ascendat, debebit cauda esse quàm rarissima. Et quamvis,
ob longe crassiorem Cometarum Atmosphæram, magnamque corporum gravitationem
Solem versus, & gravitationem particularum Aeris & vaporum in se mutuo,
fieri possit ut aer in spatiis coelestibus inque Cometarum caudis non adeo
rarescat; perexiguam tamen quantitatem aeris & vaporum ad omnia illa
caudarum phænomena abunde sufficere ex hac computatione perspicuum est. Nam
& caudarum insignis raritas colligitur ex astris per eas translucentibus.
Atmosphæra terrestris luce Solis splendens, crassitudine sua paucorum
milliarium, & astra omnia & ipsam Lunam obscurat & extinguit penitus: per
immensam verò caudarum crassitudinem, luce pariter Solari illustratam,
astra minima absque claritatis detrimento translucere noscuntur. Neque
major esse solet caudarum plurimarum splendor, quam aeris nostri in
tenebroso cubiculo latitudine digiti unius duorumve, lucem Solis in jubare
reflectentis.

Quo tempore vapor à capite ad terminum caudæ ascendit, cognosci fere potest
ducendo rectam à termino caudæ ad Solem, & notando locum ubi recta illa
Trajectoriam secat. Nam vapor in termino caudæ, si rectà ascendat à Sole,
ascendere cæpit à capite quo tempore caput erat in loco intersectionis. At
vapor non rectà ascendit à Sole, sed motum Cometæ, quem ante ascensum suum
habebat, retinendo, & cum motu ascensus sui eundem componendo, ascendit
oblique. Unde verior erit Problematis solutio, ut recta illa quæ orbem
secat, parallela sit longitudini caudæ, vel potius (ob motum curvilineum
Cometæ) ut eadem à linea caudæ divergat. Hoc pacto inveni quod vapor qui
erat in termino caudæ _Jan. 25._ ascendere cæperat à capite ante _Decemb.
11._ adeoque ascensu suo toto dies plus 45 consumpserat. At cauda illa
omnis quæ _Dec. 10._ apparuit, ascenderat spatio dierum illorum duorum, qui
à tempore perihelii Cometæ elapsi fuerant. Vapor igitur sub initio in
vicinia Solis celerrimè ascendebat, & postea cum motu per gravitatem suam
semper retardato ascendere pergebat; & ascendendo augebat longitudinem
caudæ: cauda autem quamdiu apparuit ex vapore fere omni constabat qui à
tempore perihelii ascenderat; & vapor, qui primus ascendit, & terminum
caudæ composuit, non prius evanuit quàm ob nimiam suam tam à Sole
illustrante quam ab oculis nostris distantiam videri desiit. Unde etiam
caudæ Cometarum aliorum quæ breves sunt, non ascendunt motu celeri &
perpetuo à capitibus & mox evanescunt, sed sunt permanentes vaporum &
exhalationum columnæ, à capitibus lentissimo multorum dierum motu
propagatæ, quæ, participando motum illum capitum quem habuere sub initio,
per coelos una cum capitibus moveri pergunt. Et hinc rursus colligitur
spatia cælestia vi resistendi destitui; utpote in quibus non solum solida
Planetarum & Cometarum corpora, sed etiam rarissimi caudarum vapores motus
suos velocissimos liberrimè peragunt ac diutissimè conservant.

Ascensum caudarum ex Atmosphæris capitum & progressum in partes à Sole
aversas _Keplerus_ ascribit actioni radiorum lucis materiam caudæ secum
rapientium. Et auram longe tenuissimam in spatiis liberrimis actioni
radiorum cedere, non est à ratione prorsus alienum, non obstante quod
substantiæ crassæ, impeditissimis in regionibus nostris, à radiis Solis
sensibiliter propelli nequeant. Alius particulas tam leves quam graves dari
posse existimat, & materiam caudarum levitare, perque levitatem suam à Sole
ascendere. Cùm autem gravitas corporum terrestrium sit ut materia in
corporibus, ideoque servata quantitate materiæ intendi & remitti nequeat,
suspicor ascensum illum ex rarefactione materiæ caudarum potius oriri.
Ascendit fumus in camino impulsu aeris cui innatat. Aer ille per calorem
rarefactus ascendit, ob diminutam suam gravitatem specificam, & fumum
implicatum rapit secum. Quidni cauda Cometæ ad eundem modum ascenderit à
Sole? Nam radii Solares non agitant Media quæ permeant, nisi in reflexione
& refractione. Particulæ reflectentes ea actione calefactæ calefacient
auram ætheream cui implicantur. Illa calore sibi communicato rarefiet, & ob
diminutam ea raritate gravitatem suam specificam qua prius tendebat in
Solem, ascendet & secum rapiet particulas reflectentes ex quibus cauda
componitur: Ad ascensum vaporum conducit etiam quod hi gyrantur circa Solem
& ea actione conantur à Sole recedere, at Solis Atmosphæra & materia
coelorum vel plane quiescit, vel motu solo quem à Solis rotatione
acceperint, tardius gyratur. Hæ sunt causæ ascensus caudarum in vicinia
Solis, ubi orbes curviores sunt, & Cometæ intra densiorem & ea ratione
graviorem Solis Atmosphæram consistunt, & caudas quàm longissimas mox
emittunt. Nam caudæ quæ tunc nascuntur, conservando motum suum & interea
versus Solem gravitando, movebuntur circa Solem in Ellipsibus pro more
capitum, & per motum illum capita semper comitabuntur & iis liberrimè
adhærebunt. Gravitas enim vaporum in Solem non magis efficiet ut caudæ
postea decidant à capitibus Solem versus, quam gravitas capitum efficere
possit ut hæc decidant à caudis. Communi gravitate vel simul in Solem
cadunt, vel simul in ascensu suo retardabuntur, adeoque gravitas illa non
impedit, quo minus caudæ & capita positionem quamcunque ad invicem à causis
jam descriptis aut aliis quibuscunque facillimè accipiant & postea
liberrime servent.

Caudæ igitur quæ Cometarum periheliis nascuntur, in regiones longinquas cum
eorum capitibus abibunt, & vel inde post longam annorum seriem cum iisdem
ad nos redibunt, vel potius ibi rarefacti paulatim evanescent. Nam postea
in descensu capitum ad Solem caudæ novæ breviusculæ lento motu à capitibus
propagari debebunt, & subinde, in Periheliis Cometarum illorum qui adusq;
Atmosphæram Solis descendunt, in immensum augeri. Vapor enim in spatiis
illis liberrimis perpetuò rarescit ac dilatatur. Qua ratione fit ut cauda
omnis ad extremitatem superiorem latior sit quam juxta caput Cometæ. Ea
autem rarefactione vaporem perpetuo dilatatum diffundi tandem & spargi per
coelos universos, deinde paulatim in Planetas per gravitatem suam attrahi &
cum eorum Atmosphæris misceri rationi consentaneum videtur. Nam quemadmodum
Maria ad constitutionem Terræ hujus omnino requiruntur, idque ut ex iis per
calorem Solis vapores copiose satis excitentur, qui vel in nubes coacti
decidant in pluviis, & terram omnem ad procreationem vegetabilium irrigent
& nutriant; vel in frigidis montium verticibus condensati (ut aliqui cum
ratione philosophantur) decurrant in fontes & flumina: sic ad
conservationem marium & humorum in Planetis Cometæ requiri videntur; ex
quorum exhalationibus & vaporibus condensatis, quicquid liquoris per
vegetationem & putrefactionem consumitur & in terram aridam convertitur,
continuò suppleri & refici possit. Nam vegetabilia omnia ex liquoribus
omnino crescunt, dein magna ex parte in terram aridam per putrefactionem
abeunt, & limus ex liquoribus putrefactis perpetuò decidit. Hinc moles
Terræ aridæ indies augetur, & liquores, nisi aliunde augmentum sumerent,
perpetuò decrescere deberent, ac tandem deficere. Porrò suspicor spiritum
illum, qui aeris nostri pars minima est sed subtilissima & optima, & ad
rerum omnium vitam requiritur, ex Cometis præcipue venire.

Atmosphæræ Cometarum in descensu eorum in Solem excurrendo in caudas
diminuuntur, & (ea certe in parte quæ Solem respicit) angustiores
redduntur: & vicissim in recessu eorum à Sole, ubi jam minus excurrunt in
caudas, ampliantur; si modò Phænomena eorum _Hevelius_ recte notavit.
Minimæ autem apparent ubi capita jam modo ad Solem calefacta in caudas
maximas & fulgentissimas abiere, & nuclei fumo forsan crassiore & nigriore
in Atmosphærarum partibus infimis circundantur. Nam fumus omnis ingenti
calore excitatus crassior & nigrior esse solet. Sic caput Cometæ de quo
egimus, in æqualibus à Sole ac Terrâ distantiis, obscurius apparuit post
perihelium suum quam antea. Mense enim _Decem._ cum stellis tertiæ
magnitudinis conferri solebat, at Mense _Novem._ cum stellis primæ &
secundæ. Et qui utrumq; viderant, majorem describunt Cometam priorem. Nam
Juveni cuidam _Cantabrigiensi_ _Novem. 19._ Cometa hicce luce sua
quantumvis plumbea & obtusa æquabat Spicam Virginis, & clarius micabat quàm
postea. Et _D. Storer_ literis quæ in manus nostras incidêre, scripsit
caput ejus Mense _Decembri_, ubi caudam maximam & fulgentissimam emittebat,
parvum esse & magnitudine visibili longe cedere Cometæ qui Mense _Novembri_
ante Solis ortum apparuerat. Cujus rei rationem esse conjectabatur quod
materia capitis sub initio copiosior esset & paulatim consumeretur.

Eodem spectare videtur quod capita Cometarum aliorum, qui caudas maximas &
fulgentissimas emiserunt, describantur subobscura & exigua. Nam Anno 1668
Mart. 5. St. nov. hora septima Vesp. _R. P. Valentinus Estancius_,
_Brasiliæ_ agens, Cometam vidit Horizonti proximum ad occasum Solis
brumalem, capite minimo & vix conspicuo, cauda verò supra modum fulgente,
ut stantes in littore speciem ejus è mati reflexam facilè cernerent.
Speciem utique habebat trabis splendentis longitudine 23 graduum, ab
occidente in austrum vergens, & Horizonti fere parallela. Tantus autem
splendor tres solum dies durabat, subinde notabiliter decrescens; & interea
decrescente splendore aucta est magnitudine cauda. Unde etiam in
_Portugallia_ quartam fere coeli partem (id est gradus 45) occupasse
dicitur, ab occidente in orientem splendore cum insigni protensa; nec tamen
tota apparuit, capite semper in his regionibus infra Horizontem
delitescente. Ex incremento caudæ & decremento splendoris manifestum est
quod caput à Sole recessit, eique proximum fuit sub initio, pro more Cometæ
anni 1680. Et similis legitur Cometa anni 1101 vel 1106, _cujus Stella erat
parva & obscura_ (ut ille anni 1680) _sed splendor qui ex ea exivit valde
clarus & quasi ingens trabs ad orientem & Aquilonem tendebat_, ut habet
_Hevelius_ ex _Simeone Dunelmensi_ Monacho. Apparuit initio Mensis _Feb._
circa vesperam ad occasum Solis brumalem. Inde verò & ex situ caudæ
colligitur caput fuisse Soli vicinum. _A Sole_, inquit Matthæus
Parisiensis, _distabat quasi cubito uno, ab hora tertia_ [rectius sexta]
_usque ad horam nonam radium ex se longum emittens_. Talis etiam erat
ardentissimus ille Cometa ab _Aristotele_ descriptus Lib. 1. Meteor. 6.
_cujus caput primo die non conspectum est, eo quod ante Solem vel saltem
sub radiis solaribus occidisset, sequente verò die quantum potuit visum
est. Nam quam minimâ fieri potest distantiâ Solem reliquit, & mox occubuit.
Ob nimium ardorem_ [caudæ scilicet] _nondum apparebat capitis sparsus
ignis, sed procedente tempore_ (ait Aristoteles) _cum_ [cauda] _jam minus
flagraret, reddita est_ [capiti] _Cometæ sua facies. Et splendorem suum ad
tertiam usque coeli partem_ [id est ad 60 gr.] _extendit. Apparuit autem
tempore hyberno, & ascendens usque ad cingulum Orionis ibi evanuit._ Cometa
ille anni 1618, qui è radiis Solaribus caudatissimus emersit, stellas primæ
magnitudinis æquare vel paulo superare videbatur, sed majores apparuere
Cometæ non pauci qui caudas breviores habuere. Horum aliqui Jovem, alii
Venerem vel etiam Lunam æquasse traduntur.

Diximus Cometas esse genus Planetarum in Orbibus valde excentricis circa
Solem revolventium. Et quemadmodum è Planetis non caudatis, minores esse
solent qui in orbibus minoribus & Soli proprioribus gyrantur, sie etiam
Cometas, qui in Periheliis suis ad Solem propius accedunt, ut plurimum
minores esse & in orbibus minoribus revolvi rationi consentaneum videtur.
Orbium verò transversas diametros & revolutionum tempora periodica ex
collatione Cometarum in iisdem orbibus post longa temporum intervalla
redeuntium determinanda relinquo. Interea huic negotio Propositio sequens
Lumen accendere potest.

Prop. XLII. Prob. XXI.

    _Trajectoriam Cometæ graphicè inventam corrigere._

_Oper. 1._ Assumatur positio plani Trajectoriæ, per Propositionem
superiorem graphicè inventa; & seligantur tria loca Cometæ observationibus
accuratissimis definita, & ab invicem quam maximè distantia; sitque A
tempus inter primam & secundam, ac B tempus inter secundam ac tertiam.
Cometam autem in eorum aliquo in Perigæo versari convenit, vel saltem non
longe à Perigæo abesse. Ex his locis apparentibus inveniantur per
operationes Trigonometricas loca tria vera Cometæ in assumpto illo plano
Trajectoriæ. Deinde per loca illa inventa, circa centrum Solis ceu
umbilicum, per operationes Arithmeticas, ope Prop. XXI. Lib. I. institutas,
describatur Sectio Conica: & ejus areæ, radiis à Sole ad loca inventa
ductis terminatæ, sunto D & E; nempe D area inter observationem primam &
secundam, & E area inter secundam ac tertiam. Sitque T tempus totum quo
area tota D + E, velocitate Cometæ per Prop. XVI. Lib. I. inventa, describi
debet.

_Oper. 2._ Augeatur longitudo Nodorum Plani Trajectoriæ, additis ad
longitudinem illam 20' vel 30', quæ dicantur P; & servetur plani illius
inclinatio ad planum Eclipticæ. Deinde ex prædictis tribus Cometæ locis
observatis inveniantur in hoc novo plano loca tria vera (ut supra): deinde
etiam orbis per loca illa transiens, & ejusdem areæ duæ inter observationes
descriptæ, quæ sint d & e, nec non tempus totum t quo area tota d + e
describi debeat.

_Oper. 3._ Servetur Longitudo Nodorum in operatione prima, & augeatur
inclinatio Plani Trajectoriæ ad planum Eclipticæ, additis ad inclinationem
illam 20' vel 30', quæ dicantur Q. Deinde ex observatis prædictis tribus
Cometæ locis apparentibus, inveniantur in hoc novo Plano loca tria vera,
Orbisque per loca illa transiens, ut & ejusdem areæ duæ inter observationes
descriptæ, quæ sint [delta] & [epsilon], & tempus totum [tau] quo area tota
[delta] + [epsilon] describi debeat.

Jam sit C ad 1 ut A ad B, & G ad 1 ut D ad E, & g ad 1 ut d ad e, & [gamma]
ad 1 ut [delta] ad [epsilon]; sitque S tempus verum inter observationem
primam ac tertiam; & signis + & - probe observatis quærantur numeri m & n,
ea lege ut sit G - C = mG - mg + nG - n[gamma], & T - S æquale mT - mt + nT
- n[tau]. Et si, in operatione prima, I designet inclinationem plani
Trajectoriæ ad planum Eclipticæ, & K longitudinem Nodi alterutrius: erit I
+ nQ vera inclinatio Plani Trajectoriæ ad Planum Eclipticæ, & K + mP vera
longitudo Nodi. Ac denique si in operatione prima, secunda ac tertia,
quantitates R, r & [rho] designent Latera recta Trajectoriæ, & quantitates
1 ÷ L, 1 ÷ l, 1 ÷ [lambda] ejusdem Latera transversa respectivè: erit R +
mr - mR + n[rho] - nR verum Latus rectum, & 1 ÷ {L + ml - mL + n[lambda] -
nL} verum Latus transversum Trajectoriæ quàm Cometa describit. Dato autem
Latere transverso datur etiam tempus periodicum Cometæ.   _Q. E. I._

       *       *       *       *       *


_FINIS._

       *       *       *       *       *


Corrections made to printed original.

(The Errata of the printed original have been incorporated in the main
text)

p. 6. IV. "cum Velocitate partium 10010": 'Volocitate' in original.

p. 16. "differentiæ contrariorum 17 - 1 & 18 - 2": 'contrario-' at end of
page in original, the 'rum' is only in the catchword.

p. 11. "At si attenderetur ad filum": 'attenderatur' in original.

p. 22. "si corpora ibant ad eandem plagam": 'eandam' in original.

p. 27. Lemma II. "& curva acE comprehensa": 'AcE' in original.

ibid. Lemma III. "ubi parallelogrammorum latitudines": 'parallelogramomrum'
in original.

p. 54. "occurrentem tum diametro YPG": 'occurentem' in original.

p. 66. "ad illius umbilicorum intervallum": 'il-ius' on line break in
original.

p. 69. "in secundo casu abeunte in infinitum": 'abeun-in' on line break in
original.

p. 77. Lemma XXI. "describent sectionem Conicam": 'sec-ionem' in original,
across page break: the catchword has the missing t.

p. 79. Prob. XIV. "occurrentes in T & R": 'occurentes' in original.

p. 106. "& sic in infinitum.": 'infinium' in original.

p. 112. "Cognoscatur etiam angulus tempori proportionalis":
'porportionalis' in original.

ibid. "Postea capiatur tum angulus F ad angulum B": 'augulus F' in
original.

p. 113. "Asymptotos CK": 'Asymtotos' in original.

p. 146. "pro ratione distantiarum æquales viribus quibus corpora unaquaq;
trahuntur": 'undiquaq;' in original.

p. 176. Corol. 2. "ultimo in consequentia transeundo a B ad C":
'conseqentia' in original.

p. 180. "augetq; Excentricitatem Ellipseos": 'Ellipsieos' in original.

p. 184. "non mutantur motus Augis & Nodorum sensibiliter": 'sensibilitur'
in original.

p. 219. "erit attractio corpusculi P in circulum ut {1 ÷ PA^{n-2}} - {PA ÷
PH^{n-1}}.": First term '{1 ÷ PA^{n-1}}' in original.

p. 222. "Et pari ratione": 'pari-' at end of line in original.

p. 226. "resolvo in Seriem infinitam ... m ÷ n OA^...": 'n ÷ m' in
original.

p. 254. Prop. VIII. "spatium totum descriptum distinguatur": 'descriptnm'
in original.

p. 271. Reg. 7. "determinandi hanc Hyperbolam ex Phænomenis": 'Phænominis'
in original.

ibid. "in angulis diversis HAK, hAk": The second 'hAK' in original.

p. 272. Reg. 8. "quarum AC deorsum tendat": 'tandat' in original.

p. 294. Corol. 4. "par est ratio omnium ejusdem magnitudinis":
'magitudinis' in original.

p. 297. "densitates AH, DL, QT erunt continue proportionales": Last reads
'QO' in original - the point near Q was marked O in original but changed by
to T errata.

p. 306. Corol. "accelerabatur in descensu": 'desensu' in original.

p. 312. Theor. XXIII. "in arcuum eorundem semisummam": 'eorundam' in
original.

p. 320. Corol. 2. "augerentur in duplicata ratione velocitatis":
'augerenter' in original.

p. 331. "Et si æquales illi motus applicentur": 'applicenter' in original.

p. 340. "ita ut ascensu ultimo describeret": 'describaret' in original.

p. 341. "ut 0,0002097V + 0,0008955V^{3/2} + ...": Exponent '2/3' in
original.

p. 345. "id est 7 ad 2/3": '7 ad 3/2' in original.

p. 366. "vim suam elasticam mediocrem": 'medio-' at end of line in
original, 'crem' missing.

p. 405. Prop. II. Theor. II. "(per Corol. 1. Prop. XLV. Lib. I.)": 'Coral'
in original.

p. 418. "sit ad semidiametrum Solis in eadem ratione circiter":
'semediametrum' in original.

p. 432. "alterum in Hemisphærio opposito": 'Hæmisphærio' in original.

p. 458. Corol. 2. "in revolutione puncti p generatarum": 'genetarum' in
original.

p. 480. Corol. 1. "in ratione sesquialtera": 'sequialtera' in original.

p. 482. Cas. 2. "r in + SL = s, s in + SM = t": 'r in + SL = S, S in + SM =
t' in original.

p. 487. Prob. XX. "summa temporum ad dies plus minus sexcentos":
'tempo-porum' on line break in original.

p. 504. "ascendendo augebat longitudinem caudæ": 'longi-dinem' on line
break in original.

p. 506. "ad procreationem vegetabilium irrigent & nutriant": 'vegitabilium'
in original.

p. 507. "luce sua quantumvis plumbea": 'quamtumvis' in original.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Philosophiae Naturalis Principia
Mathematica, by Isaac Newton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PHILOSOPHIAE NATURALIS ***

***** This file should be named 28233-8.txt or 28233-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/2/3/28233/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Opticks, by Isaac Newton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Opticks
       or, a Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions, Inflections,
       and Colours of Light

Author: Isaac Newton

Release Date: August 23, 2010 [EBook #33504]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OPTICKS ***




Produced by Suzanne Lybarger, steve harris, Josephine
Paolucci and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.






OPTICKS:

OR, A

TREATISE

OF THE

_Reflections_, _Refractions_,
_Inflections_ and _Colours_

OF

LIGHT.

_The_ FOURTH EDITION, _corrected_.

By Sir _ISAAC NEWTON_, Knt.

LONDON:

Printed for WILLIAM INNYS at the West-End of St. _Paul's_. MDCCXXX.

TITLE PAGE OF THE 1730 EDITION




SIR ISAAC NEWTON'S ADVERTISEMENTS




Advertisement I


_Part of the ensuing Discourse about Light was written at the Desire of
some Gentlemen of the_ Royal-Society, _in the Year 1675, and then sent
to their Secretary, and read at their Meetings, and the rest was added
about twelve Years after to complete the Theory; except the third Book,
and the last Proposition of the Second, which were since put together
out of scatter'd Papers. To avoid being engaged in Disputes about these
Matters, I have hitherto delayed the printing, and should still have
delayed it, had not the Importunity of Friends prevailed upon me. If any
other Papers writ on this Subject are got out of my Hands they are
imperfect, and were perhaps written before I had tried all the
Experiments here set down, and fully satisfied my self about the Laws of
Refractions and Composition of Colours. I have here publish'd what I
think proper to come abroad, wishing that it may not be translated into
another Language without my Consent._

_The Crowns of Colours, which sometimes appear about the Sun and Moon, I
have endeavoured to give an Account of; but for want of sufficient
Observations leave that Matter to be farther examined. The Subject of
the Third Book I have also left imperfect, not having tried all the
Experiments which I intended when I was about these Matters, nor
repeated some of those which I did try, until I had satisfied my self
about all their Circumstances. To communicate what I have tried, and
leave the rest to others for farther Enquiry, is all my Design in
publishing these Papers._

_In a Letter written to Mr._ Leibnitz _in the year 1679, and published
by Dr._ Wallis, _I mention'd a Method by which I had found some general
Theorems about squaring Curvilinear Figures, or comparing them with the
Conic Sections, or other the simplest Figures with which they may be
compared. And some Years ago I lent out a Manuscript containing such
Theorems, and having since met with some Things copied out of it, I have
on this Occasion made it publick, prefixing to it an_ Introduction, _and
subjoining a_ Scholium _concerning that Method. And I have joined with
it another small Tract concerning the Curvilinear Figures of the Second
Kind, which was also written many Years ago, and made known to some
Friends, who have solicited the making it publick._

                                        _I. N._

April 1, 1704.


Advertisement II

_In this Second Edition of these Opticks I have omitted the Mathematical
Tracts publish'd at the End of the former Edition, as not belonging to
the Subject. And at the End of the Third Book I have added some
Questions. And to shew that I do not take Gravity for an essential
Property of Bodies, I have added one Question concerning its Cause,
chusing to propose it by way of a Question, because I am not yet
satisfied about it for want of Experiments._

                                        _I. N._

July 16, 1717.


Advertisement to this Fourth Edition

_This new Edition of Sir_ Isaac Newton's Opticks _is carefully printed
from the Third Edition, as it was corrected by the Author's own Hand,
and left before his Death with the Bookseller. Since Sir_ Isaac's
Lectiones Opticæ, _which he publickly read in the University of_
Cambridge _in the Years 1669, 1670, and 1671, are lately printed, it has
been thought proper to make at the bottom of the Pages several Citations
from thence, where may be found the Demonstrations, which the Author
omitted in these_ Opticks.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note: There are several greek letters used in the
descriptions of the illustrations. They are signified by [Greek:
letter]. Square roots are noted by the letters sqrt before the equation.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FIRST BOOK OF OPTICKS




_PART I._


My Design in this Book is not to explain the Properties of Light by
Hypotheses, but to propose and prove them by Reason and Experiments: In
order to which I shall premise the following Definitions and Axioms.




_DEFINITIONS_


DEFIN. I.

_By the Rays of Light I understand its least Parts, and those as well
Successive in the same Lines, as Contemporary in several Lines._ For it
is manifest that Light consists of Parts, both Successive and
Contemporary; because in the same place you may stop that which comes
one moment, and let pass that which comes presently after; and in the
same time you may stop it in any one place, and let it pass in any
other. For that part of Light which is stopp'd cannot be the same with
that which is let pass. The least Light or part of Light, which may be
stopp'd alone without the rest of the Light, or propagated alone, or do
or suffer any thing alone, which the rest of the Light doth not or
suffers not, I call a Ray of Light.


DEFIN. II.

_Refrangibility of the Rays of Light, is their Disposition to be
refracted or turned out of their Way in passing out of one transparent
Body or Medium into another. And a greater or less Refrangibility of
Rays, is their Disposition to be turned more or less out of their Way in
like Incidences on the same Medium._ Mathematicians usually consider the
Rays of Light to be Lines reaching from the luminous Body to the Body
illuminated, and the refraction of those Rays to be the bending or
breaking of those lines in their passing out of one Medium into another.
And thus may Rays and Refractions be considered, if Light be propagated
in an instant. But by an Argument taken from the Æquations of the times
of the Eclipses of _Jupiter's Satellites_, it seems that Light is
propagated in time, spending in its passage from the Sun to us about
seven Minutes of time: And therefore I have chosen to define Rays and
Refractions in such general terms as may agree to Light in both cases.


DEFIN. III.

_Reflexibility of Rays, is their Disposition to be reflected or turned
back into the same Medium from any other Medium upon whose Surface they
fall. And Rays are more or less reflexible, which are turned back more
or less easily._ As if Light pass out of a Glass into Air, and by being
inclined more and more to the common Surface of the Glass and Air,
begins at length to be totally reflected by that Surface; those sorts of
Rays which at like Incidences are reflected most copiously, or by
inclining the Rays begin soonest to be totally reflected, are most
reflexible.


DEFIN. IV.

_The Angle of Incidence is that Angle, which the Line described by the
incident Ray contains with the Perpendicular to the reflecting or
refracting Surface at the Point of Incidence._


DEFIN. V.

_The Angle of Reflexion or Refraction, is the Angle which the line
described by the reflected or refracted Ray containeth with the
Perpendicular to the reflecting or refracting Surface at the Point of
Incidence._


DEFIN. VI.

_The Sines of Incidence, Reflexion, and Refraction, are the Sines of the
Angles of Incidence, Reflexion, and Refraction._


DEFIN. VII

_The Light whose Rays are all alike Refrangible, I call Simple,
Homogeneal and Similar; and that whose Rays are some more Refrangible
than others, I call Compound, Heterogeneal and Dissimilar._ The former
Light I call Homogeneal, not because I would affirm it so in all
respects, but because the Rays which agree in Refrangibility, agree at
least in all those their other Properties which I consider in the
following Discourse.


DEFIN. VIII.

_The Colours of Homogeneal Lights, I call Primary, Homogeneal and
Simple; and those of Heterogeneal Lights, Heterogeneal and Compound._
For these are always compounded of the colours of Homogeneal Lights; as
will appear in the following Discourse.




_AXIOMS._


AX. I.

_The Angles of Reflexion and Refraction, lie in one and the same Plane
with the Angle of Incidence._


AX. II.

_The Angle of Reflexion is equal to the Angle of Incidence._


AX. III.

_If the refracted Ray be returned directly back to the Point of
Incidence, it shall be refracted into the Line before described by the
incident Ray._


AX. IV.

_Refraction out of the rarer Medium into the denser, is made towards the
Perpendicular; that is, so that the Angle of Refraction be less than the
Angle of Incidence._


AX. V.

_The Sine of Incidence is either accurately or very nearly in a given
Ratio to the Sine of Refraction._

Whence if that Proportion be known in any one Inclination of the
incident Ray, 'tis known in all the Inclinations, and thereby the
Refraction in all cases of Incidence on the same refracting Body may be
determined. Thus if the Refraction be made out of Air into Water, the
Sine of Incidence of the red Light is to the Sine of its Refraction as 4
to 3. If out of Air into Glass, the Sines are as 17 to 11. In Light of
other Colours the Sines have other Proportions: but the difference is so
little that it need seldom be considered.

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

Suppose therefore, that RS [in _Fig._ 1.] represents the Surface of
stagnating Water, and that C is the point of Incidence in which any Ray
coming in the Air from A in the Line AC is reflected or refracted, and I
would know whither this Ray shall go after Reflexion or Refraction: I
erect upon the Surface of the Water from the point of Incidence the
Perpendicular CP and produce it downwards to Q, and conclude by the
first Axiom, that the Ray after Reflexion and Refraction, shall be
found somewhere in the Plane of the Angle of Incidence ACP produced. I
let fall therefore upon the Perpendicular CP the Sine of Incidence AD;
and if the reflected Ray be desired, I produce AD to B so that DB be
equal to AD, and draw CB. For this Line CB shall be the reflected Ray;
the Angle of Reflexion BCP and its Sine BD being equal to the Angle and
Sine of Incidence, as they ought to be by the second Axiom, But if the
refracted Ray be desired, I produce AD to H, so that DH may be to AD as
the Sine of Refraction to the Sine of Incidence, that is, (if the Light
be red) as 3 to 4; and about the Center C and in the Plane ACP with the
Radius CA describing a Circle ABE, I draw a parallel to the
Perpendicular CPQ, the Line HE cutting the Circumference in E, and
joining CE, this Line CE shall be the Line of the refracted Ray. For if
EF be let fall perpendicularly on the Line PQ, this Line EF shall be the
Sine of Refraction of the Ray CE, the Angle of Refraction being ECQ; and
this Sine EF is equal to DH, and consequently in Proportion to the Sine
of Incidence AD as 3 to 4.

In like manner, if there be a Prism of Glass (that is, a Glass bounded
with two Equal and Parallel Triangular ends, and three plain and well
polished Sides, which meet in three Parallel Lines running from the
three Angles of one end to the three Angles of the other end) and if the
Refraction of the Light in passing cross this Prism be desired: Let ACB
[in _Fig._ 2.] represent a Plane cutting this Prism transversly to its
three Parallel lines or edges there where the Light passeth through it,
and let DE be the Ray incident upon the first side of the Prism AC where
the Light goes into the Glass; and by putting the Proportion of the Sine
of Incidence to the Sine of Refraction as 17 to 11 find EF the first
refracted Ray. Then taking this Ray for the Incident Ray upon the second
side of the Glass BC where the Light goes out, find the next refracted
Ray FG by putting the Proportion of the Sine of Incidence to the Sine of
Refraction as 11 to 17. For if the Sine of Incidence out of Air into
Glass be to the Sine of Refraction as 17 to 11, the Sine of Incidence
out of Glass into Air must on the contrary be to the Sine of Refraction
as 11 to 17, by the third Axiom.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Much after the same manner, if ACBD [in _Fig._ 3.] represent a Glass
spherically convex on both sides (usually called a _Lens_, such as is a
Burning-glass, or Spectacle-glass, or an Object-glass of a Telescope)
and it be required to know how Light falling upon it from any lucid
point Q shall be refracted, let QM represent a Ray falling upon any
point M of its first spherical Surface ACB, and by erecting a
Perpendicular to the Glass at the point M, find the first refracted Ray
MN by the Proportion of the Sines 17 to 11. Let that Ray in going out of
the Glass be incident upon N, and then find the second refracted Ray
N_q_ by the Proportion of the Sines 11 to 17. And after the same manner
may the Refraction be found when the Lens is convex on one side and
plane or concave on the other, or concave on both sides.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]


AX. VI.

_Homogeneal Rays which flow from several Points of any Object, and fall
perpendicularly or almost perpendicularly on any reflecting or
refracting Plane or spherical Surface, shall afterwards diverge from so
many other Points, or be parallel to so many other Lines, or converge to
so many other Points, either accurately or without any sensible Error.
And the same thing will happen, if the Rays be reflected or refracted
successively by two or three or more Plane or Spherical Surfaces._

The Point from which Rays diverge or to which they converge may be
called their _Focus_. And the Focus of the incident Rays being given,
that of the reflected or refracted ones may be found by finding the
Refraction of any two Rays, as above; or more readily thus.

_Cas._ 1. Let ACB [in _Fig._ 4.] be a reflecting or refracting Plane,
and Q the Focus of the incident Rays, and Q_q_C a Perpendicular to that
Plane. And if this Perpendicular be produced to _q_, so that _q_C be
equal to QC, the Point _q_ shall be the Focus of the reflected Rays: Or
if _q_C be taken on the same side of the Plane with QC, and in
proportion to QC as the Sine of Incidence to the Sine of Refraction, the
Point _q_ shall be the Focus of the refracted Rays.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

_Cas._ 2. Let ACB [in _Fig._ 5.] be the reflecting Surface of any Sphere
whose Centre is E. Bisect any Radius thereof, (suppose EC) in T, and if
in that Radius on the same side the Point T you take the Points Q and
_q_, so that TQ, TE, and T_q_, be continual Proportionals, and the Point
Q be the Focus of the incident Rays, the Point _q_ shall be the Focus of
the reflected ones.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

_Cas._ 3. Let ACB [in _Fig._ 6.] be the refracting Surface of any Sphere
whose Centre is E. In any Radius thereof EC produced both ways take ET
and C_t_ equal to one another and severally in such Proportion to that
Radius as the lesser of the Sines of Incidence and Refraction hath to
the difference of those Sines. And then if in the same Line you find any
two Points Q and _q_, so that TQ be to ET as E_t_ to _tq_, taking _tq_
the contrary way from _t_ which TQ lieth from T, and if the Point Q be
the Focus of any incident Rays, the Point _q_ shall be the Focus of the
refracted ones.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

And by the same means the Focus of the Rays after two or more Reflexions
or Refractions may be found.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

_Cas._ 4. Let ACBD [in _Fig._ 7.] be any refracting Lens, spherically
Convex or Concave or Plane on either side, and let CD be its Axis (that
is, the Line which cuts both its Surfaces perpendicularly, and passes
through the Centres of the Spheres,) and in this Axis produced let F and
_f_ be the Foci of the refracted Rays found as above, when the incident
Rays on both sides the Lens are parallel to the same Axis; and upon the
Diameter F_f_ bisected in E, describe a Circle. Suppose now that any
Point Q be the Focus of any incident Rays. Draw QE cutting the said
Circle in T and _t_, and therein take _tq_ in such proportion to _t_E as
_t_E or TE hath to TQ. Let _tq_ lie the contrary way from _t_ which TQ
doth from T, and _q_ shall be the Focus of the refracted Rays without
any sensible Error, provided the Point Q be not so remote from the Axis,
nor the Lens so broad as to make any of the Rays fall too obliquely on
the refracting Surfaces.[A]

And by the like Operations may the reflecting or refracting Surfaces be
found when the two Foci are given, and thereby a Lens be formed, which
shall make the Rays flow towards or from what Place you please.[B]

So then the Meaning of this Axiom is, that if Rays fall upon any Plane
or Spherical Surface or Lens, and before their Incidence flow from or
towards any Point Q, they shall after Reflexion or Refraction flow from
or towards the Point _q_ found by the foregoing Rules. And if the
incident Rays flow from or towards several points Q, the reflected or
refracted Rays shall flow from or towards so many other Points _q_
found by the same Rules. Whether the reflected and refracted Rays flow
from or towards the Point _q_ is easily known by the situation of that
Point. For if that Point be on the same side of the reflecting or
refracting Surface or Lens with the Point Q, and the incident Rays flow
from the Point Q, the reflected flow towards the Point _q_ and the
refracted from it; and if the incident Rays flow towards Q, the
reflected flow from _q_, and the refracted towards it. And the contrary
happens when _q_ is on the other side of the Surface.


AX. VII.

_Wherever the Rays which come from all the Points of any Object meet
again in so many Points after they have been made to converge by
Reflection or Refraction, there they will make a Picture of the Object
upon any white Body on which they fall._

So if PR [in _Fig._ 3.] represent any Object without Doors, and AB be a
Lens placed at a hole in the Window-shut of a dark Chamber, whereby the
Rays that come from any Point Q of that Object are made to converge and
meet again in the Point _q_; and if a Sheet of white Paper be held at
_q_ for the Light there to fall upon it, the Picture of that Object PR
will appear upon the Paper in its proper shape and Colours. For as the
Light which comes from the Point Q goes to the Point _q_, so the Light
which comes from other Points P and R of the Object, will go to so many
other correspondent Points _p_ and _r_ (as is manifest by the sixth
Axiom;) so that every Point of the Object shall illuminate a
correspondent Point of the Picture, and thereby make a Picture like the
Object in Shape and Colour, this only excepted, that the Picture shall
be inverted. And this is the Reason of that vulgar Experiment of casting
the Species of Objects from abroad upon a Wall or Sheet of white Paper
in a dark Room.

In like manner, when a Man views any Object PQR, [in _Fig._ 8.] the
Light which comes from the several Points of the Object is so refracted
by the transparent skins and humours of the Eye, (that is, by the
outward coat EFG, called the _Tunica Cornea_, and by the crystalline
humour AB which is beyond the Pupil _mk_) as to converge and meet again
in so many Points in the bottom of the Eye, and there to paint the
Picture of the Object upon that skin (called the _Tunica Retina_) with
which the bottom of the Eye is covered. For Anatomists, when they have
taken off from the bottom of the Eye that outward and most thick Coat
called the _Dura Mater_, can then see through the thinner Coats, the
Pictures of Objects lively painted thereon. And these Pictures,
propagated by Motion along the Fibres of the Optick Nerves into the
Brain, are the cause of Vision. For accordingly as these Pictures are
perfect or imperfect, the Object is seen perfectly or imperfectly. If
the Eye be tinged with any colour (as in the Disease of the _Jaundice_)
so as to tinge the Pictures in the bottom of the Eye with that Colour,
then all Objects appear tinged with the same Colour. If the Humours of
the Eye by old Age decay, so as by shrinking to make the _Cornea_ and
Coat of the _Crystalline Humour_ grow flatter than before, the Light
will not be refracted enough, and for want of a sufficient Refraction
will not converge to the bottom of the Eye but to some place beyond it,
and by consequence paint in the bottom of the Eye a confused Picture,
and according to the Indistinctness of this Picture the Object will
appear confused. This is the reason of the decay of sight in old Men,
and shews why their Sight is mended by Spectacles. For those Convex
glasses supply the defect of plumpness in the Eye, and by increasing the
Refraction make the Rays converge sooner, so as to convene distinctly at
the bottom of the Eye if the Glass have a due degree of convexity. And
the contrary happens in short-sighted Men whose Eyes are too plump. For
the Refraction being now too great, the Rays converge and convene in the
Eyes before they come at the bottom; and therefore the Picture made in
the bottom and the Vision caused thereby will not be distinct, unless
the Object be brought so near the Eye as that the place where the
converging Rays convene may be removed to the bottom, or that the
plumpness of the Eye be taken off and the Refractions diminished by a
Concave-glass of a due degree of Concavity, or lastly that by Age the
Eye grow flatter till it come to a due Figure: For short-sighted Men see
remote Objects best in Old Age, and therefore they are accounted to have
the most lasting Eyes.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]


AX. VIII.

_An Object seen by Reflexion or Refraction, appears in that place from
whence the Rays after their last Reflexion or Refraction diverge in
falling on the Spectator's Eye._

[Illustration: FIG. 9.]

If the Object A [in FIG. 9.] be seen by Reflexion of a Looking-glass
_mn_, it shall appear, not in its proper place A, but behind the Glass
at _a_, from whence any Rays AB, AC, AD, which flow from one and the
same Point of the Object, do after their Reflexion made in the Points B,
C, D, diverge in going from the Glass to E, F, G, where they are
incident on the Spectator's Eyes. For these Rays do make the same
Picture in the bottom of the Eyes as if they had come from the Object
really placed at _a_ without the Interposition of the Looking-glass; and
all Vision is made according to the place and shape of that Picture.

In like manner the Object D [in FIG. 2.] seen through a Prism, appears
not in its proper place D, but is thence translated to some other place
_d_ situated in the last refracted Ray FG drawn backward from F to _d_.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.]

And so the Object Q [in FIG. 10.] seen through the Lens AB, appears at
the place _q_ from whence the Rays diverge in passing from the Lens to
the Eye. Now it is to be noted, that the Image of the Object at _q_ is
so much bigger or lesser than the Object it self at Q, as the distance
of the Image at _q_ from the Lens AB is bigger or less than the distance
of the Object at Q from the same Lens. And if the Object be seen through
two or more such Convex or Concave-glasses, every Glass shall make a new
Image, and the Object shall appear in the place of the bigness of the
last Image. Which consideration unfolds the Theory of Microscopes and
Telescopes. For that Theory consists in almost nothing else than the
describing such Glasses as shall make the last Image of any Object as
distinct and large and luminous as it can conveniently be made.

I have now given in Axioms and their Explications the sum of what hath
hitherto been treated of in Opticks. For what hath been generally
agreed on I content my self to assume under the notion of Principles, in
order to what I have farther to write. And this may suffice for an
Introduction to Readers of quick Wit and good Understanding not yet
versed in Opticks: Although those who are already acquainted with this
Science, and have handled Glasses, will more readily apprehend what
followeth.

FOOTNOTES:

[A] In our Author's _Lectiones Opticæ_, Part I. Sect. IV. Prop 29, 30,
there is an elegant Method of determining these _Foci_; not only in
spherical Surfaces, but likewise in any other curved Figure whatever:
And in Prop. 32, 33, the same thing is done for any Ray lying out of the
Axis.

[B] _Ibid._ Prop. 34.




_PROPOSITIONS._



_PROP._ I. THEOR. I.

_Lights which differ in Colour, differ also in Degrees of
Refrangibility._

The PROOF by Experiments.

_Exper._ 1.

I took a black oblong stiff Paper terminated by Parallel Sides, and with
a Perpendicular right Line drawn cross from one Side to the other,
distinguished it into two equal Parts. One of these parts I painted with
a red colour and the other with a blue. The Paper was very black, and
the Colours intense and thickly laid on, that the Phænomenon might be
more conspicuous. This Paper I view'd through a Prism of solid Glass,
whose two Sides through which the Light passed to the Eye were plane and
well polished, and contained an Angle of about sixty degrees; which
Angle I call the refracting Angle of the Prism. And whilst I view'd it,
I held it and the Prism before a Window in such manner that the Sides of
the Paper were parallel to the Prism, and both those Sides and the Prism
were parallel to the Horizon, and the cross Line was also parallel to
it: and that the Light which fell from the Window upon the Paper made an
Angle with the Paper, equal to that Angle which was made with the same
Paper by the Light reflected from it to the Eye. Beyond the Prism was
the Wall of the Chamber under the Window covered over with black Cloth,
and the Cloth was involved in Darkness that no Light might be reflected
from thence, which in passing by the Edges of the Paper to the Eye,
might mingle itself with the Light of the Paper, and obscure the
Phænomenon thereof. These things being thus ordered, I found that if the
refracting Angle of the Prism be turned upwards, so that the Paper may
seem to be lifted upwards by the Refraction, its blue half will be
lifted higher by the Refraction than its red half. But if the refracting
Angle of the Prism be turned downward, so that the Paper may seem to be
carried lower by the Refraction, its blue half will be carried something
lower thereby than its red half. Wherefore in both Cases the Light which
comes from the blue half of the Paper through the Prism to the Eye, does
in like Circumstances suffer a greater Refraction than the Light which
comes from the red half, and by consequence is more refrangible.

_Illustration._ In the eleventh Figure, MN represents the Window, and DE
the Paper terminated with parallel Sides DJ and HE, and by the
transverse Line FG distinguished into two halfs, the one DG of an
intensely blue Colour, the other FE of an intensely red. And BAC_cab_
represents the Prism whose refracting Planes AB_ba_ and AC_ca_ meet in
the Edge of the refracting Angle A_a_. This Edge A_a_ being upward, is
parallel both to the Horizon, and to the Parallel-Edges of the Paper DJ
and HE, and the transverse Line FG is perpendicular to the Plane of the
Window. And _de_ represents the Image of the Paper seen by Refraction
upwards in such manner, that the blue half DG is carried higher to _dg_
than the red half FE is to _fe_, and therefore suffers a greater
Refraction. If the Edge of the refracting Angle be turned downward, the
Image of the Paper will be refracted downward; suppose to [Greek: de],
and the blue half will be refracted lower to [Greek: dg] than the red
half is to [Greek: pe].

[Illustration: FIG. 11.]

_Exper._ 2. About the aforesaid Paper, whose two halfs were painted over
with red and blue, and which was stiff like thin Pasteboard, I lapped
several times a slender Thred of very black Silk, in such manner that
the several parts of the Thred might appear upon the Colours like so
many black Lines drawn over them, or like long and slender dark Shadows
cast upon them. I might have drawn black Lines with a Pen, but the
Threds were smaller and better defined. This Paper thus coloured and
lined I set against a Wall perpendicularly to the Horizon, so that one
of the Colours might stand to the Right Hand, and the other to the Left.
Close before the Paper, at the Confine of the Colours below, I placed a
Candle to illuminate the Paper strongly: For the Experiment was tried in
the Night. The Flame of the Candle reached up to the lower edge of the
Paper, or a very little higher. Then at the distance of six Feet, and
one or two Inches from the Paper upon the Floor I erected a Glass Lens
four Inches and a quarter broad, which might collect the Rays coming
from the several Points of the Paper, and make them converge towards so
many other Points at the same distance of six Feet, and one or two
Inches on the other side of the Lens, and so form the Image of the
coloured Paper upon a white Paper placed there, after the same manner
that a Lens at a Hole in a Window casts the Images of Objects abroad
upon a Sheet of white Paper in a dark Room. The aforesaid white Paper,
erected perpendicular to the Horizon, and to the Rays which fell upon it
from the Lens, I moved sometimes towards the Lens, sometimes from it, to
find the Places where the Images of the blue and red Parts of the
coloured Paper appeared most distinct. Those Places I easily knew by the
Images of the black Lines which I had made by winding the Silk about the
Paper. For the Images of those fine and slender Lines (which by reason
of their Blackness were like Shadows on the Colours) were confused and
scarce visible, unless when the Colours on either side of each Line were
terminated most distinctly, Noting therefore, as diligently as I could,
the Places where the Images of the red and blue halfs of the coloured
Paper appeared most distinct, I found that where the red half of the
Paper appeared distinct, the blue half appeared confused, so that the
black Lines drawn upon it could scarce be seen; and on the contrary,
where the blue half appeared most distinct, the red half appeared
confused, so that the black Lines upon it were scarce visible. And
between the two Places where these Images appeared distinct there was
the distance of an Inch and a half; the distance of the white Paper from
the Lens, when the Image of the red half of the coloured Paper appeared
most distinct, being greater by an Inch and an half than the distance of
the same white Paper from the Lens, when the Image of the blue half
appeared most distinct. In like Incidences therefore of the blue and red
upon the Lens, the blue was refracted more by the Lens than the red, so
as to converge sooner by an Inch and a half, and therefore is more
refrangible.

_Illustration._ In the twelfth Figure (p. 27), DE signifies the coloured
Paper, DG the blue half, FE the red half, MN the Lens, HJ the white
Paper in that Place where the red half with its black Lines appeared
distinct, and _hi_ the same Paper in that Place where the blue half
appeared distinct. The Place _hi_ was nearer to the Lens MN than the
Place HJ by an Inch and an half.

_Scholium._ The same Things succeed, notwithstanding that some of the
Circumstances be varied; as in the first Experiment when the Prism and
Paper are any ways inclined to the Horizon, and in both when coloured
Lines are drawn upon very black Paper. But in the Description of these
Experiments, I have set down such Circumstances, by which either the
Phænomenon might be render'd more conspicuous, or a Novice might more
easily try them, or by which I did try them only. The same Thing, I have
often done in the following Experiments: Concerning all which, this one
Admonition may suffice. Now from these Experiments it follows not, that
all the Light of the blue is more refrangible than all the Light of the
red: For both Lights are mixed of Rays differently refrangible, so that
in the red there are some Rays not less refrangible than those of the
blue, and in the blue there are some Rays not more refrangible than
those of the red: But these Rays, in proportion to the whole Light, are
but few, and serve to diminish the Event of the Experiment, but are not
able to destroy it. For, if the red and blue Colours were more dilute
and weak, the distance of the Images would be less than an Inch and a
half; and if they were more intense and full, that distance would be
greater, as will appear hereafter. These Experiments may suffice for the
Colours of Natural Bodies. For in the Colours made by the Refraction of
Prisms, this Proposition will appear by the Experiments which are now to
follow in the next Proposition.


_PROP._ II. THEOR. II.

_The Light of the Sun consists of Rays differently Refrangible._

The PROOF by Experiments.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.]

[Illustration: FIG. 13.]

_Exper._ 3.

In a very dark Chamber, at a round Hole, about one third Part of an Inch
broad, made in the Shut of a Window, I placed a Glass Prism, whereby the
Beam of the Sun's Light, which came in at that Hole, might be refracted
upwards toward the opposite Wall of the Chamber, and there form a
colour'd Image of the Sun. The Axis of the Prism (that is, the Line
passing through the middle of the Prism from one end of it to the other
end parallel to the edge of the Refracting Angle) was in this and the
following Experiments perpendicular to the incident Rays. About this
Axis I turned the Prism slowly, and saw the refracted Light on the Wall,
or coloured Image of the Sun, first to descend, and then to ascend.
Between the Descent and Ascent, when the Image seemed Stationary, I
stopp'd the Prism, and fix'd it in that Posture, that it should be moved
no more. For in that Posture the Refractions of the Light at the two
Sides of the refracting Angle, that is, at the Entrance of the Rays into
the Prism, and at their going out of it, were equal to one another.[C]
So also in other Experiments, as often as I would have the Refractions
on both sides the Prism to be equal to one another, I noted the Place
where the Image of the Sun formed by the refracted Light stood still
between its two contrary Motions, in the common Period of its Progress
and Regress; and when the Image fell upon that Place, I made fast the
Prism. And in this Posture, as the most convenient, it is to be
understood that all the Prisms are placed in the following Experiments,
unless where some other Posture is described. The Prism therefore being
placed in this Posture, I let the refracted Light fall perpendicularly
upon a Sheet of white Paper at the opposite Wall of the Chamber, and
observed the Figure and Dimensions of the Solar Image formed on the
Paper by that Light. This Image was Oblong and not Oval, but terminated
with two Rectilinear and Parallel Sides, and two Semicircular Ends. On
its Sides it was bounded pretty distinctly, but on its Ends very
confusedly and indistinctly, the Light there decaying and vanishing by
degrees. The Breadth of this Image answered to the Sun's Diameter, and
was about two Inches and the eighth Part of an Inch, including the
Penumbra. For the Image was eighteen Feet and an half distant from the
Prism, and at this distance that Breadth, if diminished by the Diameter
of the Hole in the Window-shut, that is by a quarter of an Inch,
subtended an Angle at the Prism of about half a Degree, which is the
Sun's apparent Diameter. But the Length of the Image was about ten
Inches and a quarter, and the Length of the Rectilinear Sides about
eight Inches; and the refracting Angle of the Prism, whereby so great a
Length was made, was 64 degrees. With a less Angle the Length of the
Image was less, the Breadth remaining the same. If the Prism was turned
about its Axis that way which made the Rays emerge more obliquely out of
the second refracting Surface of the Prism, the Image soon became an
Inch or two longer, or more; and if the Prism was turned about the
contrary way, so as to make the Rays fall more obliquely on the first
refracting Surface, the Image soon became an Inch or two shorter. And
therefore in trying this Experiment, I was as curious as I could be in
placing the Prism by the above-mention'd Rule exactly in such a Posture,
that the Refractions of the Rays at their Emergence out of the Prism
might be equal to that at their Incidence on it. This Prism had some
Veins running along within the Glass from one end to the other, which
scattered some of the Sun's Light irregularly, but had no sensible
Effect in increasing the Length of the coloured Spectrum. For I tried
the same Experiment with other Prisms with the same Success. And
particularly with a Prism which seemed free from such Veins, and whose
refracting Angle was 62-1/2 Degrees, I found the Length of the Image
9-3/4 or 10 Inches at the distance of 18-1/2 Feet from the Prism, the
Breadth of the Hole in the Window-shut being 1/4 of an Inch, as before.
And because it is easy to commit a Mistake in placing the Prism in its
due Posture, I repeated the Experiment four or five Times, and always
found the Length of the Image that which is set down above. With another
Prism of clearer Glass and better Polish, which seemed free from Veins,
and whose refracting Angle was 63-1/2 Degrees, the Length of this Image
at the same distance of 18-1/2 Feet was also about 10 Inches, or 10-1/8.
Beyond these Measures for about a 1/4 or 1/3 of an Inch at either end of
the Spectrum the Light of the Clouds seemed to be a little tinged with
red and violet, but so very faintly, that I suspected that Tincture
might either wholly, or in great Measure arise from some Rays of the
Spectrum scattered irregularly by some Inequalities in the Substance and
Polish of the Glass, and therefore I did not include it in these
Measures. Now the different Magnitude of the hole in the Window-shut,
and different thickness of the Prism where the Rays passed through it,
and different inclinations of the Prism to the Horizon, made no sensible
changes in the length of the Image. Neither did the different matter of
the Prisms make any: for in a Vessel made of polished Plates of Glass
cemented together in the shape of a Prism and filled with Water, there
is the like Success of the Experiment according to the quantity of the
Refraction. It is farther to be observed, that the Rays went on in right
Lines from the Prism to the Image, and therefore at their very going out
of the Prism had all that Inclination to one another from which the
length of the Image proceeded, that is, the Inclination of more than two
degrees and an half. And yet according to the Laws of Opticks vulgarly
received, they could not possibly be so much inclined to one another.[D]
For let EG [_Fig._ 13. (p. 27)] represent the Window-shut, F the hole
made therein through which a beam of the Sun's Light was transmitted
into the darkened Chamber, and ABC a Triangular Imaginary Plane whereby
the Prism is feigned to be cut transversely through the middle of the
Light. Or if you please, let ABC represent the Prism it self, looking
directly towards the Spectator's Eye with its nearer end: And let XY be
the Sun, MN the Paper upon which the Solar Image or Spectrum is cast,
and PT the Image it self whose sides towards _v_ and _w_ are Rectilinear
and Parallel, and ends towards P and T Semicircular. YKHP and XLJT are
two Rays, the first of which comes from the lower part of the Sun to the
higher part of the Image, and is refracted in the Prism at K and H, and
the latter comes from the higher part of the Sun to the lower part of
the Image, and is refracted at L and J. Since the Refractions on both
sides the Prism are equal to one another, that is, the Refraction at K
equal to the Refraction at J, and the Refraction at L equal to the
Refraction at H, so that the Refractions of the incident Rays at K and L
taken together, are equal to the Refractions of the emergent Rays at H
and J taken together: it follows by adding equal things to equal things,
that the Refractions at K and H taken together, are equal to the
Refractions at J and L taken together, and therefore the two Rays being
equally refracted, have the same Inclination to one another after
Refraction which they had before; that is, the Inclination of half a
Degree answering to the Sun's Diameter. For so great was the inclination
of the Rays to one another before Refraction. So then, the length of the
Image PT would by the Rules of Vulgar Opticks subtend an Angle of half a
Degree at the Prism, and by Consequence be equal to the breadth _vw_;
and therefore the Image would be round. Thus it would be were the two
Rays XLJT and YKHP, and all the rest which form the Image P_w_T_v_,
alike refrangible. And therefore seeing by Experience it is found that
the Image is not round, but about five times longer than broad, the Rays
which going to the upper end P of the Image suffer the greatest
Refraction, must be more refrangible than those which go to the lower
end T, unless the Inequality of Refraction be casual.

This Image or Spectrum PT was coloured, being red at its least refracted
end T, and violet at its most refracted end P, and yellow green and
blue in the intermediate Spaces. Which agrees with the first
Proposition, that Lights which differ in Colour, do also differ in
Refrangibility. The length of the Image in the foregoing Experiments, I
measured from the faintest and outmost red at one end, to the faintest
and outmost blue at the other end, excepting only a little Penumbra,
whose breadth scarce exceeded a quarter of an Inch, as was said above.

_Exper._ 4. In the Sun's Beam which was propagated into the Room through
the hole in the Window-shut, at the distance of some Feet from the hole,
I held the Prism in such a Posture, that its Axis might be perpendicular
to that Beam. Then I looked through the Prism upon the hole, and turning
the Prism to and fro about its Axis, to make the Image of the Hole
ascend and descend, when between its two contrary Motions it seemed
Stationary, I stopp'd the Prism, that the Refractions of both sides of
the refracting Angle might be equal to each other, as in the former
Experiment. In this situation of the Prism viewing through it the said
Hole, I observed the length of its refracted Image to be many times
greater than its breadth, and that the most refracted part thereof
appeared violet, the least refracted red, the middle parts blue, green
and yellow in order. The same thing happen'd when I removed the Prism
out of the Sun's Light, and looked through it upon the hole shining by
the Light of the Clouds beyond it. And yet if the Refraction were done
regularly according to one certain Proportion of the Sines of Incidence
and Refraction as is vulgarly supposed, the refracted Image ought to
have appeared round.

So then, by these two Experiments it appears, that in Equal Incidences
there is a considerable inequality of Refractions. But whence this
inequality arises, whether it be that some of the incident Rays are
refracted more, and others less, constantly, or by chance, or that one
and the same Ray is by Refraction disturbed, shatter'd, dilated, and as
it were split and spread into many diverging Rays, as _Grimaldo_
supposes, does not yet appear by these Experiments, but will appear by
those that follow.

_Exper._ 5. Considering therefore, that if in the third Experiment the
Image of the Sun should be drawn out into an oblong Form, either by a
Dilatation of every Ray, or by any other casual inequality of the
Refractions, the same oblong Image would by a second Refraction made
sideways be drawn out as much in breadth by the like Dilatation of the
Rays, or other casual inequality of the Refractions sideways, I tried
what would be the Effects of such a second Refraction. For this end I
ordered all things as in the third Experiment, and then placed a second
Prism immediately after the first in a cross Position to it, that it
might again refract the beam of the Sun's Light which came to it through
the first Prism. In the first Prism this beam was refracted upwards, and
in the second sideways. And I found that by the Refraction of the second
Prism, the breadth of the Image was not increased, but its superior
part, which in the first Prism suffered the greater Refraction, and
appeared violet and blue, did again in the second Prism suffer a greater
Refraction than its inferior part, which appeared red and yellow, and
this without any Dilatation of the Image in breadth.

[Illustration: FIG. 14]

_Illustration._ Let S [_Fig._ 14, 15.] represent the Sun, F the hole in
the Window, ABC the first Prism, DH the second Prism, Y the round Image
of the Sun made by a direct beam of Light when the Prisms are taken
away, PT the oblong Image of the Sun made by that beam passing through
the first Prism alone, when the second Prism is taken away, and _pt_ the
Image made by the cross Refractions of both Prisms together. Now if the
Rays which tend towards the several Points of the round Image Y were
dilated and spread by the Refraction of the first Prism, so that they
should not any longer go in single Lines to single Points, but that
every Ray being split, shattered, and changed from a Linear Ray to a
Superficies of Rays diverging from the Point of Refraction, and lying in
the Plane of the Angles of Incidence and Refraction, they should go in
those Planes to so many Lines reaching almost from one end of the Image
PT to the other, and if that Image should thence become oblong: those
Rays and their several parts tending towards the several Points of the
Image PT ought to be again dilated and spread sideways by the transverse
Refraction of the second Prism, so as to compose a four square Image,
such as is represented at [Greek: pt]. For the better understanding of
which, let the Image PT be distinguished into five equal parts PQK,
KQRL, LRSM, MSVN, NVT. And by the same irregularity that the orbicular
Light Y is by the Refraction of the first Prism dilated and drawn out
into a long Image PT, the Light PQK which takes up a space of the same
length and breadth with the Light Y ought to be by the Refraction of the
second Prism dilated and drawn out into the long Image _[Greek: p]qkp_,
and the Light KQRL into the long Image _kqrl_, and the Lights LRSM,
MSVN, NVT, into so many other long Images _lrsm_, _msvn_, _nvt[Greek:
t]_; and all these long Images would compose the four square Images
_[Greek: pt]_. Thus it ought to be were every Ray dilated by Refraction,
and spread into a triangular Superficies of Rays diverging from the
Point of Refraction. For the second Refraction would spread the Rays one
way as much as the first doth another, and so dilate the Image in
breadth as much as the first doth in length. And the same thing ought to
happen, were some rays casually refracted more than others. But the
Event is otherwise. The Image PT was not made broader by the Refraction
of the second Prism, but only became oblique, as 'tis represented at
_pt_, its upper end P being by the Refraction translated to a greater
distance than its lower end T. So then the Light which went towards the
upper end P of the Image, was (at equal Incidences) more refracted in
the second Prism, than the Light which tended towards the lower end T,
that is the blue and violet, than the red and yellow; and therefore was
more refrangible. The same Light was by the Refraction of the first
Prism translated farther from the place Y to which it tended before
Refraction; and therefore suffered as well in the first Prism as in the
second a greater Refraction than the rest of the Light, and by
consequence was more refrangible than the rest, even before its
incidence on the first Prism.

Sometimes I placed a third Prism after the second, and sometimes also a
fourth after the third, by all which the Image might be often refracted
sideways: but the Rays which were more refracted than the rest in the
first Prism were also more refracted in all the rest, and that without
any Dilatation of the Image sideways: and therefore those Rays for their
constancy of a greater Refraction are deservedly reputed more
refrangible.

[Illustration: FIG. 15]

But that the meaning of this Experiment may more clearly appear, it is
to be considered that the Rays which are equally refrangible do fall
upon a Circle answering to the Sun's Disque. For this was proved in the
third Experiment. By a Circle I understand not here a perfect
geometrical Circle, but any orbicular Figure whose length is equal to
its breadth, and which, as to Sense, may seem circular. Let therefore AG
[in _Fig._ 15.] represent the Circle which all the most refrangible Rays
propagated from the whole Disque of the Sun, would illuminate and paint
upon the opposite Wall if they were alone; EL the Circle which all the
least refrangible Rays would in like manner illuminate and paint if they
were alone; BH, CJ, DK, the Circles which so many intermediate sorts of
Rays would successively paint upon the Wall, if they were singly
propagated from the Sun in successive order, the rest being always
intercepted; and conceive that there are other intermediate Circles
without Number, which innumerable other intermediate sorts of Rays would
successively paint upon the Wall if the Sun should successively emit
every sort apart. And seeing the Sun emits all these sorts at once, they
must all together illuminate and paint innumerable equal Circles, of all
which, being according to their degrees of Refrangibility placed in
order in a continual Series, that oblong Spectrum PT is composed which I
described in the third Experiment. Now if the Sun's circular Image Y [in
_Fig._ 15.] which is made by an unrefracted beam of Light was by any
Dilation of the single Rays, or by any other irregularity in the
Refraction of the first Prism, converted into the oblong Spectrum, PT:
then ought every Circle AG, BH, CJ, &c. in that Spectrum, by the cross
Refraction of the second Prism again dilating or otherwise scattering
the Rays as before, to be in like manner drawn out and transformed into
an oblong Figure, and thereby the breadth of the Image PT would be now
as much augmented as the length of the Image Y was before by the
Refraction of the first Prism; and thus by the Refractions of both
Prisms together would be formed a four square Figure _p[Greek:
p]t[Greek: t]_, as I described above. Wherefore since the breadth of the
Spectrum PT is not increased by the Refraction sideways, it is certain
that the Rays are not split or dilated, or otherways irregularly
scatter'd by that Refraction, but that every Circle is by a regular and
uniform Refraction translated entire into another Place, as the Circle
AG by the greatest Refraction into the place _ag_, the Circle BH by a
less Refraction into the place _bh_, the Circle CJ by a Refraction still
less into the place _ci_, and so of the rest; by which means a new
Spectrum _pt_ inclined to the former PT is in like manner composed of
Circles lying in a right Line; and these Circles must be of the same
bigness with the former, because the breadths of all the Spectrums Y, PT
and _pt_ at equal distances from the Prisms are equal.

I considered farther, that by the breadth of the hole F through which
the Light enters into the dark Chamber, there is a Penumbra made in the
Circuit of the Spectrum Y, and that Penumbra remains in the rectilinear
Sides of the Spectrums PT and _pt_. I placed therefore at that hole a
Lens or Object-glass of a Telescope which might cast the Image of the
Sun distinctly on Y without any Penumbra at all, and found that the
Penumbra of the rectilinear Sides of the oblong Spectrums PT and _pt_
was also thereby taken away, so that those Sides appeared as distinctly
defined as did the Circumference of the first Image Y. Thus it happens
if the Glass of the Prisms be free from Veins, and their sides be
accurately plane and well polished without those numberless Waves or
Curles which usually arise from Sand-holes a little smoothed in
polishing with Putty. If the Glass be only well polished and free from
Veins, and the Sides not accurately plane, but a little Convex or
Concave, as it frequently happens; yet may the three Spectrums Y, PT and
_pt_ want Penumbras, but not in equal distances from the Prisms. Now
from this want of Penumbras, I knew more certainly that every one of the
Circles was refracted according to some most regular, uniform and
constant Law. For if there were any irregularity in the Refraction, the
right Lines AE and GL, which all the Circles in the Spectrum PT do
touch, could not by that Refraction be translated into the Lines _ae_
and _gl_ as distinct and straight as they were before, but there would
arise in those translated Lines some Penumbra or Crookedness or
Undulation, or other sensible Perturbation contrary to what is found by
Experience. Whatsoever Penumbra or Perturbation should be made in the
Circles by the cross Refraction of the second Prism, all that Penumbra
or Perturbation would be conspicuous in the right Lines _ae_ and _gl_
which touch those Circles. And therefore since there is no such Penumbra
or Perturbation in those right Lines, there must be none in the
Circles. Since the distance between those Tangents or breadth of the
Spectrum is not increased by the Refractions, the Diameters of the
Circles are not increased thereby. Since those Tangents continue to be
right Lines, every Circle which in the first Prism is more or less
refracted, is exactly in the same proportion more or less refracted in
the second. And seeing all these things continue to succeed after the
same manner when the Rays are again in a third Prism, and again in a
fourth refracted sideways, it is evident that the Rays of one and the
same Circle, as to their degree of Refrangibility, continue always
uniform and homogeneal to one another, and that those of several Circles
do differ in degree of Refrangibility, and that in some certain and
constant Proportion. Which is the thing I was to prove.

There is yet another Circumstance or two of this Experiment by which it
becomes still more plain and convincing. Let the second Prism DH [in
_Fig._ 16.] be placed not immediately after the first, but at some
distance from it; suppose in the mid-way between it and the Wall on
which the oblong Spectrum PT is cast, so that the Light from the first
Prism may fall upon it in the form of an oblong Spectrum [Greek: pt]
parallel to this second Prism, and be refracted sideways to form the
oblong Spectrum _pt_ upon the Wall. And you will find as before, that
this Spectrum _pt_ is inclined to that Spectrum PT, which the first
Prism forms alone without the second; the blue ends P and _p_ being
farther distant from one another than the red ones T and _t_, and by
consequence that the Rays which go to the blue end [Greek: p] of the
Image [Greek: pt], and which therefore suffer the greatest Refraction in
the first Prism, are again in the second Prism more refracted than the
rest.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.]

[Illustration: FIG. 17.]

The same thing I try'd also by letting the Sun's Light into a dark Room
through two little round holes F and [Greek: ph] [in _Fig._ 17.] made in
the Window, and with two parallel Prisms ABC and [Greek: abg] placed at
those holes (one at each) refracting those two beams of Light to the
opposite Wall of the Chamber, in such manner that the two colour'd
Images PT and MN which they there painted were joined end to end and lay
in one straight Line, the red end T of the one touching the blue end M
of the other. For if these two refracted Beams were again by a third
Prism DH placed cross to the two first, refracted sideways, and the
Spectrums thereby translated to some other part of the Wall of the
Chamber, suppose the Spectrum PT to _pt_ and the Spectrum MN to _mn_,
these translated Spectrums _pt_ and _mn_ would not lie in one straight
Line with their ends contiguous as before, but be broken off from one
another and become parallel, the blue end _m_ of the Image _mn_ being by
a greater Refraction translated farther from its former place MT, than
the red end _t_ of the other Image _pt_ from the same place MT; which
puts the Proposition past Dispute. And this happens whether the third
Prism DH be placed immediately after the two first, or at a great
distance from them, so that the Light refracted in the two first Prisms
be either white and circular, or coloured and oblong when it falls on
the third.

_Exper._ 6. In the middle of two thin Boards I made round holes a third
part of an Inch in diameter, and in the Window-shut a much broader hole
being made to let into my darkned Chamber a large Beam of the Sun's
Light; I placed a Prism behind the Shut in that beam to refract it
towards the opposite Wall, and close behind the Prism I fixed one of the
Boards, in such manner that the middle of the refracted Light might pass
through the hole made in it, and the rest be intercepted by the Board.
Then at the distance of about twelve Feet from the first Board I fixed
the other Board in such manner that the middle of the refracted Light
which came through the hole in the first Board, and fell upon the
opposite Wall, might pass through the hole in this other Board, and the
rest being intercepted by the Board might paint upon it the coloured
Spectrum of the Sun. And close behind this Board I fixed another Prism
to refract the Light which came through the hole. Then I returned
speedily to the first Prism, and by turning it slowly to and fro about
its Axis, I caused the Image which fell upon the second Board to move up
and down upon that Board, that all its parts might successively pass
through the hole in that Board and fall upon the Prism behind it. And in
the mean time, I noted the places on the opposite Wall to which that
Light after its Refraction in the second Prism did pass; and by the
difference of the places I found that the Light which being most
refracted in the first Prism did go to the blue end of the Image, was
again more refracted in the second Prism than the Light which went to
the red end of that Image, which proves as well the first Proposition as
the second. And this happened whether the Axis of the two Prisms were
parallel, or inclined to one another, and to the Horizon in any given
Angles.

_Illustration._ Let F [in _Fig._ 18.] be the wide hole in the
Window-shut, through which the Sun shines upon the first Prism ABC, and
let the refracted Light fall upon the middle of the Board DE, and the
middle part of that Light upon the hole G made in the middle part of
that Board. Let this trajected part of that Light fall again upon the
middle of the second Board _de_, and there paint such an oblong coloured
Image of the Sun as was described in the third Experiment. By turning
the Prism ABC slowly to and fro about its Axis, this Image will be made
to move up and down the Board _de_, and by this means all its parts from
one end to the other may be made to pass successively through the hole
_g_ which is made in the middle of that Board. In the mean while another
Prism _abc_ is to be fixed next after that hole _g_, to refract the
trajected Light a second time. And these things being thus ordered, I
marked the places M and N of the opposite Wall upon which the refracted
Light fell, and found that whilst the two Boards and second Prism
remained unmoved, those places by turning the first Prism about its Axis
were changed perpetually. For when the lower part of the Light which
fell upon the second Board _de_ was cast through the hole _g_, it went
to a lower place M on the Wall and when the higher part of that Light
was cast through the same hole _g_, it went to a higher place N on the
Wall, and when any intermediate part of the Light was cast through that
hole, it went to some place on the Wall between M and N. The unchanged
Position of the holes in the Boards, made the Incidence of the Rays upon
the second Prism to be the same in all cases. And yet in that common
Incidence some of the Rays were more refracted, and others less. And
those were more refracted in this Prism, which by a greater Refraction
in the first Prism were more turned out of the way, and therefore for
their Constancy of being more refracted are deservedly called more
refrangible.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.]

[Illustration: FIG. 20.]

_Exper._ 7. At two holes made near one another in my Window-shut I
placed two Prisms, one at each, which might cast upon the opposite Wall
(after the manner of the third Experiment) two oblong coloured Images of
the Sun. And at a little distance from the Wall I placed a long slender
Paper with straight and parallel edges, and ordered the Prisms and Paper
so, that the red Colour of one Image might fall directly upon one half
of the Paper, and the violet Colour of the other Image upon the other
half of the same Paper; so that the Paper appeared of two Colours, red
and violet, much after the manner of the painted Paper in the first and
second Experiments. Then with a black Cloth I covered the Wall behind
the Paper, that no Light might be reflected from it to disturb the
Experiment, and viewing the Paper through a third Prism held parallel
to it, I saw that half of it which was illuminated by the violet Light
to be divided from the other half by a greater Refraction, especially
when I went a good way off from the Paper. For when I viewed it too near
at hand, the two halfs of the Paper did not appear fully divided from
one another, but seemed contiguous at one of their Angles like the
painted Paper in the first Experiment. Which also happened when the
Paper was too broad.

[Illustration: FIG. 19.]

Sometimes instead of the Paper I used a white Thred, and this appeared
through the Prism divided into two parallel Threds as is represented in
the nineteenth Figure, where DG denotes the Thred illuminated with
violet Light from D to E and with red Light from F to G, and _defg_ are
the parts of the Thred seen by Refraction. If one half of the Thred be
constantly illuminated with red, and the other half be illuminated with
all the Colours successively, (which may be done by causing one of the
Prisms to be turned about its Axis whilst the other remains unmoved)
this other half in viewing the Thred through the Prism, will appear in
a continual right Line with the first half when illuminated with red,
and begin to be a little divided from it when illuminated with Orange,
and remove farther from it when illuminated with yellow, and still
farther when with green, and farther when with blue, and go yet farther
off when illuminated with Indigo, and farthest when with deep violet.
Which plainly shews, that the Lights of several Colours are more and
more refrangible one than another, in this Order of their Colours, red,
orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, deep violet; and so proves as well
the first Proposition as the second.

I caused also the coloured Spectrums PT [in _Fig._ 17.] and MN made in a
dark Chamber by the Refractions of two Prisms to lie in a Right Line end
to end, as was described above in the fifth Experiment, and viewing them
through a third Prism held parallel to their Length, they appeared no
longer in a Right Line, but became broken from one another, as they are
represented at _pt_ and _mn_, the violet end _m_ of the Spectrum _mn_
being by a greater Refraction translated farther from its former Place
MT than the red end _t_ of the other Spectrum _pt_.

I farther caused those two Spectrums PT [in _Fig._ 20.] and MN to become
co-incident in an inverted Order of their Colours, the red end of each
falling on the violet end of the other, as they are represented in the
oblong Figure PTMN; and then viewing them through a Prism DH held
parallel to their Length, they appeared not co-incident, as when view'd
with the naked Eye, but in the form of two distinct Spectrums _pt_ and
_mn_ crossing one another in the middle after the manner of the Letter
X. Which shews that the red of the one Spectrum and violet of the other,
which were co-incident at PN and MT, being parted from one another by a
greater Refraction of the violet to _p_ and _m_ than of the red to _n_
and _t_, do differ in degrees of Refrangibility.

I illuminated also a little Circular Piece of white Paper all over with
the Lights of both Prisms intermixed, and when it was illuminated with
the red of one Spectrum, and deep violet of the other, so as by the
Mixture of those Colours to appear all over purple, I viewed the Paper,
first at a less distance, and then at a greater, through a third Prism;
and as I went from the Paper, the refracted Image thereof became more
and more divided by the unequal Refraction of the two mixed Colours, and
at length parted into two distinct Images, a red one and a violet one,
whereof the violet was farthest from the Paper, and therefore suffered
the greatest Refraction. And when that Prism at the Window, which cast
the violet on the Paper was taken away, the violet Image disappeared;
but when the other Prism was taken away the red vanished; which shews,
that these two Images were nothing else than the Lights of the two
Prisms, which had been intermixed on the purple Paper, but were parted
again by their unequal Refractions made in the third Prism, through
which the Paper was view'd. This also was observable, that if one of the
Prisms at the Window, suppose that which cast the violet on the Paper,
was turned about its Axis to make all the Colours in this order,
violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, red, fall successively on
the Paper from that Prism, the violet Image changed Colour accordingly,
turning successively to indigo, blue, green, yellow and red, and in
changing Colour came nearer and nearer to the red Image made by the
other Prism, until when it was also red both Images became fully
co-incident.

I placed also two Paper Circles very near one another, the one in the
red Light of one Prism, and the other in the violet Light of the other.
The Circles were each of them an Inch in diameter, and behind them the
Wall was dark, that the Experiment might not be disturbed by any Light
coming from thence. These Circles thus illuminated, I viewed through a
Prism, so held, that the Refraction might be made towards the red
Circle, and as I went from them they came nearer and nearer together,
and at length became co-incident; and afterwards when I went still
farther off, they parted again in a contrary Order, the violet by a
greater Refraction being carried beyond the red.

_Exper._ 8. In Summer, when the Sun's Light uses to be strongest, I
placed a Prism at the Hole of the Window-shut, as in the third
Experiment, yet so that its Axis might be parallel to the Axis of the
World, and at the opposite Wall in the Sun's refracted Light, I placed
an open Book. Then going six Feet and two Inches from the Book, I placed
there the above-mentioned Lens, by which the Light reflected from the
Book might be made to converge and meet again at the distance of six
Feet and two Inches behind the Lens, and there paint the Species of the
Book upon a Sheet of white Paper much after the manner of the second
Experiment. The Book and Lens being made fast, I noted the Place where
the Paper was, when the Letters of the Book, illuminated by the fullest
red Light of the Solar Image falling upon it, did cast their Species on
that Paper most distinctly: And then I stay'd till by the Motion of the
Sun, and consequent Motion of his Image on the Book, all the Colours
from that red to the middle of the blue pass'd over those Letters; and
when those Letters were illuminated by that blue, I noted again the
Place of the Paper when they cast their Species most distinctly upon it:
And I found that this last Place of the Paper was nearer to the Lens
than its former Place by about two Inches and an half, or two and three
quarters. So much sooner therefore did the Light in the violet end of
the Image by a greater Refraction converge and meet, than the Light in
the red end. But in trying this, the Chamber was as dark as I could make
it. For, if these Colours be diluted and weakned by the Mixture of any
adventitious Light, the distance between the Places of the Paper will
not be so great. This distance in the second Experiment, where the
Colours of natural Bodies were made use of, was but an Inch and an half,
by reason of the Imperfection of those Colours. Here in the Colours of
the Prism, which are manifestly more full, intense, and lively than
those of natural Bodies, the distance is two Inches and three quarters.
And were the Colours still more full, I question not but that the
distance would be considerably greater. For the coloured Light of the
Prism, by the interfering of the Circles described in the second Figure
of the fifth Experiment, and also by the Light of the very bright Clouds
next the Sun's Body intermixing with these Colours, and by the Light
scattered by the Inequalities in the Polish of the Prism, was so very
much compounded, that the Species which those faint and dark Colours,
the indigo and violet, cast upon the Paper were not distinct enough to
be well observed.

_Exper._ 9. A Prism, whose two Angles at its Base were equal to one
another, and half right ones, and the third a right one, I placed in a
Beam of the Sun's Light let into a dark Chamber through a Hole in the
Window-shut, as in the third Experiment. And turning the Prism slowly
about its Axis, until all the Light which went through one of its
Angles, and was refracted by it began to be reflected by its Base, at
which till then it went out of the Glass, I observed that those Rays
which had suffered the greatest Refraction were sooner reflected than
the rest. I conceived therefore, that those Rays of the reflected Light,
which were most refrangible, did first of all by a total Reflexion
become more copious in that Light than the rest, and that afterwards the
rest also, by a total Reflexion, became as copious as these. To try
this, I made the reflected Light pass through another Prism, and being
refracted by it to fall afterwards upon a Sheet of white Paper placed
at some distance behind it, and there by that Refraction to paint the
usual Colours of the Prism. And then causing the first Prism to be
turned about its Axis as above, I observed that when those Rays, which
in this Prism had suffered the greatest Refraction, and appeared of a
blue and violet Colour began to be totally reflected, the blue and
violet Light on the Paper, which was most refracted in the second Prism,
received a sensible Increase above that of the red and yellow, which was
least refracted; and afterwards, when the rest of the Light which was
green, yellow, and red, began to be totally reflected in the first
Prism, the Light of those Colours on the Paper received as great an
Increase as the violet and blue had done before. Whence 'tis manifest,
that the Beam of Light reflected by the Base of the Prism, being
augmented first by the more refrangible Rays, and afterwards by the less
refrangible ones, is compounded of Rays differently refrangible. And
that all such reflected Light is of the same Nature with the Sun's Light
before its Incidence on the Base of the Prism, no Man ever doubted; it
being generally allowed, that Light by such Reflexions suffers no
Alteration in its Modifications and Properties. I do not here take
Notice of any Refractions made in the sides of the first Prism, because
the Light enters it perpendicularly at the first side, and goes out
perpendicularly at the second side, and therefore suffers none. So then,
the Sun's incident Light being of the same Temper and Constitution with
his emergent Light, and the last being compounded of Rays differently
refrangible, the first must be in like manner compounded.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.]

_Illustration._ In the twenty-first Figure, ABC is the first Prism, BC
its Base, B and C its equal Angles at the Base, each of 45 Degrees, A
its rectangular Vertex, FM a beam of the Sun's Light let into a dark
Room through a hole F one third part of an Inch broad, M its Incidence
on the Base of the Prism, MG a less refracted Ray, MH a more refracted
Ray, MN the beam of Light reflected from the Base, VXY the second Prism
by which this beam in passing through it is refracted, N_t_ the less
refracted Light of this beam, and N_p_ the more refracted part thereof.
When the first Prism ABC is turned about its Axis according to the order
of the Letters ABC, the Rays MH emerge more and more obliquely out of
that Prism, and at length after their most oblique Emergence are
reflected towards N, and going on to _p_ do increase the Number of the
Rays N_p_. Afterwards by continuing the Motion of the first Prism, the
Rays MG are also reflected to N and increase the number of the Rays
N_t_. And therefore the Light MN admits into its Composition, first the
more refrangible Rays, and then the less refrangible Rays, and yet after
this Composition is of the same Nature with the Sun's immediate Light
FM, the Reflexion of the specular Base BC causing no Alteration therein.

_Exper._ 10. Two Prisms, which were alike in Shape, I tied so together,
that their Axis and opposite Sides being parallel, they composed a
Parallelopiped. And, the Sun shining into my dark Chamber through a
little hole in the Window-shut, I placed that Parallelopiped in his beam
at some distance from the hole, in such a Posture, that the Axes of the
Prisms might be perpendicular to the incident Rays, and that those Rays
being incident upon the first Side of one Prism, might go on through the
two contiguous Sides of both Prisms, and emerge out of the last Side of
the second Prism. This Side being parallel to the first Side of the
first Prism, caused the emerging Light to be parallel to the incident.
Then, beyond these two Prisms I placed a third, which might refract that
emergent Light, and by that Refraction cast the usual Colours of the
Prism upon the opposite Wall, or upon a sheet of white Paper held at a
convenient Distance behind the Prism for that refracted Light to fall
upon it. After this I turned the Parallelopiped about its Axis, and
found that when the contiguous Sides of the two Prisms became so oblique
to the incident Rays, that those Rays began all of them to be
reflected, those Rays which in the third Prism had suffered the greatest
Refraction, and painted the Paper with violet and blue, were first of
all by a total Reflexion taken out of the transmitted Light, the rest
remaining and on the Paper painting their Colours of green, yellow,
orange and red, as before; and afterwards by continuing the Motion of
the two Prisms, the rest of the Rays also by a total Reflexion vanished
in order, according to their degrees of Refrangibility. The Light
therefore which emerged out of the two Prisms is compounded of Rays
differently refrangible, seeing the more refrangible Rays may be taken
out of it, while the less refrangible remain. But this Light being
trajected only through the parallel Superficies of the two Prisms, if it
suffer'd any change by the Refraction of one Superficies it lost that
Impression by the contrary Refraction of the other Superficies, and so
being restor'd to its pristine Constitution, became of the same Nature
and Condition as at first before its Incidence on those Prisms; and
therefore, before its Incidence, was as much compounded of Rays
differently refrangible, as afterwards.

[Illustration: FIG. 22.]

_Illustration._ In the twenty second Figure ABC and BCD are the two
Prisms tied together in the form of a Parallelopiped, their Sides BC and
CB being contiguous, and their Sides AB and CD parallel. And HJK is the
third Prism, by which the Sun's Light propagated through the hole F into
the dark Chamber, and there passing through those sides of the Prisms
AB, BC, CB and CD, is refracted at O to the white Paper PT, falling
there partly upon P by a greater Refraction, partly upon T by a less
Refraction, and partly upon R and other intermediate places by
intermediate Refractions. By turning the Parallelopiped ACBD about its
Axis, according to the order of the Letters A, C, D, B, at length when
the contiguous Planes BC and CB become sufficiently oblique to the Rays
FM, which are incident upon them at M, there will vanish totally out of
the refracted Light OPT, first of all the most refracted Rays OP, (the
rest OR and OT remaining as before) then the Rays OR and other
intermediate ones, and lastly, the least refracted Rays OT. For when
the Plane BC becomes sufficiently oblique to the Rays incident upon it,
those Rays will begin to be totally reflected by it towards N; and first
the most refrangible Rays will be totally reflected (as was explained in
the preceding Experiment) and by Consequence must first disappear at P,
and afterwards the rest as they are in order totally reflected to N,
they must disappear in the same order at R and T. So then the Rays which
at O suffer the greatest Refraction, may be taken out of the Light MO
whilst the rest of the Rays remain in it, and therefore that Light MO is
compounded of Rays differently refrangible. And because the Planes AB
and CD are parallel, and therefore by equal and contrary Refractions
destroy one anothers Effects, the incident Light FM must be of the same
Kind and Nature with the emergent Light MO, and therefore doth also
consist of Rays differently refrangible. These two Lights FM and MO,
before the most refrangible Rays are separated out of the emergent Light
MO, agree in Colour, and in all other Properties so far as my
Observation reaches, and therefore are deservedly reputed of the same
Nature and Constitution, and by Consequence the one is compounded as
well as the other. But after the most refrangible Rays begin to be
totally reflected, and thereby separated out of the emergent Light MO,
that Light changes its Colour from white to a dilute and faint yellow, a
pretty good orange, a very full red successively, and then totally
vanishes. For after the most refrangible Rays which paint the Paper at
P with a purple Colour, are by a total Reflexion taken out of the beam
of Light MO, the rest of the Colours which appear on the Paper at R and
T being mix'd in the Light MO compound there a faint yellow, and after
the blue and part of the green which appear on the Paper between P and R
are taken away, the rest which appear between R and T (that is the
yellow, orange, red and a little green) being mixed in the beam MO
compound there an orange; and when all the Rays are by Reflexion taken
out of the beam MO, except the least refrangible, which at T appear of a
full red, their Colour is the same in that beam MO as afterwards at T,
the Refraction of the Prism HJK serving only to separate the differently
refrangible Rays, without making any Alteration in their Colours, as
shall be more fully proved hereafter. All which confirms as well the
first Proposition as the second.

_Scholium._ If this Experiment and the former be conjoined and made one
by applying a fourth Prism VXY [in _Fig._ 22.] to refract the reflected
beam MN towards _tp_, the Conclusion will be clearer. For then the Light
N_p_ which in the fourth Prism is more refracted, will become fuller and
stronger when the Light OP, which in the third Prism HJK is more
refracted, vanishes at P; and afterwards when the less refracted Light
OT vanishes at T, the less refracted Light N_t_ will become increased
whilst the more refracted Light at _p_ receives no farther increase. And
as the trajected beam MO in vanishing is always of such a Colour as
ought to result from the mixture of the Colours which fall upon the
Paper PT, so is the reflected beam MN always of such a Colour as ought
to result from the mixture of the Colours which fall upon the Paper
_pt_. For when the most refrangible Rays are by a total Reflexion taken
out of the beam MO, and leave that beam of an orange Colour, the Excess
of those Rays in the reflected Light, does not only make the violet,
indigo and blue at _p_ more full, but also makes the beam MN change from
the yellowish Colour of the Sun's Light, to a pale white inclining to
blue, and afterward recover its yellowish Colour again, so soon as all
the rest of the transmitted Light MOT is reflected.

Now seeing that in all this variety of Experiments, whether the Trial be
made in Light reflected, and that either from natural Bodies, as in the
first and second Experiment, or specular, as in the ninth; or in Light
refracted, and that either before the unequally refracted Rays are by
diverging separated from one another, and losing their whiteness which
they have altogether, appear severally of several Colours, as in the
fifth Experiment; or after they are separated from one another, and
appear colour'd as in the sixth, seventh, and eighth Experiments; or in
Light trajected through parallel Superficies, destroying each others
Effects, as in the tenth Experiment; there are always found Rays, which
at equal Incidences on the same Medium suffer unequal Refractions, and
that without any splitting or dilating of single Rays, or contingence in
the inequality of the Refractions, as is proved in the fifth and sixth
Experiments. And seeing the Rays which differ in Refrangibility may be
parted and sorted from one another, and that either by Refraction as in
the third Experiment, or by Reflexion as in the tenth, and then the
several sorts apart at equal Incidences suffer unequal Refractions, and
those sorts are more refracted than others after Separation, which were
more refracted before it, as in the sixth and following Experiments, and
if the Sun's Light be trajected through three or more cross Prisms
successively, those Rays which in the first Prism are refracted more
than others, are in all the following Prisms refracted more than others
in the same Rate and Proportion, as appears by the fifth Experiment;
it's manifest that the Sun's Light is an heterogeneous Mixture of Rays,
some of which are constantly more refrangible than others, as was
proposed.


_PROP._ III. THEOR. III.

_The Sun's Light consists of Rays differing in Reflexibility, and those
Rays are more reflexible than others which are more refrangible._

This is manifest by the ninth and tenth Experiments: For in the ninth
Experiment, by turning the Prism about its Axis, until the Rays within
it which in going out into the Air were refracted by its Base, became so
oblique to that Base, as to begin to be totally reflected thereby; those
Rays became first of all totally reflected, which before at equal
Incidences with the rest had suffered the greatest Refraction. And the
same thing happens in the Reflexion made by the common Base of the two
Prisms in the tenth Experiment.


_PROP._ IV. PROB. I.

_To separate from one another the heterogeneous Rays of compound Light._

[Illustration: FIG. 23.]

The heterogeneous Rays are in some measure separated from one another by
the Refraction of the Prism in the third Experiment, and in the fifth
Experiment, by taking away the Penumbra from the rectilinear sides of
the coloured Image, that Separation in those very rectilinear sides or
straight edges of the Image becomes perfect. But in all places between
those rectilinear edges, those innumerable Circles there described,
which are severally illuminated by homogeneal Rays, by interfering with
one another, and being every where commix'd, do render the Light
sufficiently compound. But if these Circles, whilst their Centers keep
their Distances and Positions, could be made less in Diameter, their
interfering one with another, and by Consequence the Mixture of the
heterogeneous Rays would be proportionally diminish'd. In the twenty
third Figure let AG, BH, CJ, DK, EL, FM be the Circles which so many
sorts of Rays flowing from the same disque of the Sun, do in the third
Experiment illuminate; of all which and innumerable other intermediate
ones lying in a continual Series between the two rectilinear and
parallel edges of the Sun's oblong Image PT, that Image is compos'd, as
was explained in the fifth Experiment. And let _ag_, _bh_, _ci_, _dk_,
_el_, _fm_ be so many less Circles lying in a like continual Series
between two parallel right Lines _af_ and _gm_ with the same distances
between their Centers, and illuminated by the same sorts of Rays, that
is the Circle _ag_ with the same sort by which the corresponding Circle
AG was illuminated, and the Circle _bh_ with the same sort by which the
corresponding Circle BH was illuminated, and the rest of the Circles
_ci_, _dk_, _el_, _fm_ respectively, with the same sorts of Rays by
which the several corresponding Circles CJ, DK, EL, FM were illuminated.
In the Figure PT composed of the greater Circles, three of those Circles
AG, BH, CJ, are so expanded into one another, that the three sorts of
Rays by which those Circles are illuminated, together with other
innumerable sorts of intermediate Rays, are mixed at QR in the middle
of the Circle BH. And the like Mixture happens throughout almost the
whole length of the Figure PT. But in the Figure _pt_ composed of the
less Circles, the three less Circles _ag_, _bh_, _ci_, which answer to
those three greater, do not extend into one another; nor are there any
where mingled so much as any two of the three sorts of Rays by which
those Circles are illuminated, and which in the Figure PT are all of
them intermingled at BH.

Now he that shall thus consider it, will easily understand that the
Mixture is diminished in the same Proportion with the Diameters of the
Circles. If the Diameters of the Circles whilst their Centers remain the
same, be made three times less than before, the Mixture will be also
three times less; if ten times less, the Mixture will be ten times less,
and so of other Proportions. That is, the Mixture of the Rays in the
greater Figure PT will be to their Mixture in the less _pt_, as the
Latitude of the greater Figure is to the Latitude of the less. For the
Latitudes of these Figures are equal to the Diameters of their Circles.
And hence it easily follows, that the Mixture of the Rays in the
refracted Spectrum _pt_ is to the Mixture of the Rays in the direct and
immediate Light of the Sun, as the breadth of that Spectrum is to the
difference between the length and breadth of the same Spectrum.

So then, if we would diminish the Mixture of the Rays, we are to
diminish the Diameters of the Circles. Now these would be diminished if
the Sun's Diameter to which they answer could be made less than it is,
or (which comes to the same Purpose) if without Doors, at a great
distance from the Prism towards the Sun, some opake Body were placed,
with a round hole in the middle of it, to intercept all the Sun's Light,
excepting so much as coming from the middle of his Body could pass
through that Hole to the Prism. For so the Circles AG, BH, and the rest,
would not any longer answer to the whole Disque of the Sun, but only to
that Part of it which could be seen from the Prism through that Hole,
that it is to the apparent Magnitude of that Hole view'd from the Prism.
But that these Circles may answer more distinctly to that Hole, a Lens
is to be placed by the Prism to cast the Image of the Hole, (that is,
every one of the Circles AG, BH, &c.) distinctly upon the Paper at PT,
after such a manner, as by a Lens placed at a Window, the Species of
Objects abroad are cast distinctly upon a Paper within the Room, and the
rectilinear Sides of the oblong Solar Image in the fifth Experiment
became distinct without any Penumbra. If this be done, it will not be
necessary to place that Hole very far off, no not beyond the Window. And
therefore instead of that Hole, I used the Hole in the Window-shut, as
follows.

_Exper._ 11. In the Sun's Light let into my darken'd Chamber through a
small round Hole in my Window-shut, at about ten or twelve Feet from the
Window, I placed a Lens, by which the Image of the Hole might be
distinctly cast upon a Sheet of white Paper, placed at the distance of
six, eight, ten, or twelve Feet from the Lens. For, according to the
difference of the Lenses I used various distances, which I think not
worth the while to describe. Then immediately after the Lens I placed a
Prism, by which the trajected Light might be refracted either upwards or
sideways, and thereby the round Image, which the Lens alone did cast
upon the Paper might be drawn out into a long one with Parallel Sides,
as in the third Experiment. This oblong Image I let fall upon another
Paper at about the same distance from the Prism as before, moving the
Paper either towards the Prism or from it, until I found the just
distance where the Rectilinear Sides of the Image became most distinct.
For in this Case, the Circular Images of the Hole, which compose that
Image after the same manner that the Circles _ag_, _bh_, _ci_, &c. do
the Figure _pt_ [in _Fig._ 23.] were terminated most distinctly without
any Penumbra, and therefore extended into one another the least that
they could, and by consequence the Mixture of the heterogeneous Rays was
now the least of all. By this means I used to form an oblong Image (such
as is _pt_) [in _Fig._ 23, and 24.] of Circular Images of the Hole,
(such as are _ag_, _bh_, _ci_, &c.) and by using a greater or less Hole
in the Window-shut, I made the Circular Images _ag_, _bh_, _ci_, &c. of
which it was formed, to become greater or less at pleasure, and thereby
the Mixture of the Rays in the Image _pt_ to be as much, or as little as
I desired.

[Illustration: FIG. 24.]

_Illustration._ In the twenty-fourth Figure, F represents the Circular
Hole in the Window-shut, MN the Lens, whereby the Image or Species of
that Hole is cast distinctly upon a Paper at J, ABC the Prism, whereby
the Rays are at their emerging out of the Lens refracted from J towards
another Paper at _pt_, and the round Image at J is turned into an oblong
Image _pt_ falling on that other Paper. This Image _pt_ consists of
Circles placed one after another in a Rectilinear Order, as was
sufficiently explained in the fifth Experiment; and these Circles are
equal to the Circle J, and consequently answer in magnitude to the Hole
F; and therefore by diminishing that Hole they may be at pleasure
diminished, whilst their Centers remain in their Places. By this means I
made the Breadth of the Image _pt_ to be forty times, and sometimes
sixty or seventy times less than its Length. As for instance, if the
Breadth of the Hole F be one tenth of an Inch, and MF the distance of
the Lens from the Hole be 12 Feet; and if _p_B or _p_M the distance of
the Image _pt_ from the Prism or Lens be 10 Feet, and the refracting
Angle of the Prism be 62 Degrees, the Breadth of the Image _pt_ will be
one twelfth of an Inch, and the Length about six Inches, and therefore
the Length to the Breadth as 72 to 1, and by consequence the Light of
this Image 71 times less compound than the Sun's direct Light. And Light
thus far simple and homogeneal, is sufficient for trying all the
Experiments in this Book about simple Light. For the Composition of
heterogeneal Rays is in this Light so little, that it is scarce to be
discovered and perceiv'd by Sense, except perhaps in the indigo and
violet. For these being dark Colours do easily suffer a sensible Allay
by that little scattering Light which uses to be refracted irregularly
by the Inequalities of the Prism.

Yet instead of the Circular Hole F, 'tis better to substitute an oblong
Hole shaped like a long Parallelogram with its Length parallel to the
Prism ABC. For if this Hole be an Inch or two long, and but a tenth or
twentieth Part of an Inch broad, or narrower; the Light of the Image
_pt_ will be as simple as before, or simpler, and the Image will become
much broader, and therefore more fit to have Experiments try'd in its
Light than before.

Instead of this Parallelogram Hole may be substituted a triangular one
of equal Sides, whose Base, for instance, is about the tenth Part of an
Inch, and its Height an Inch or more. For by this means, if the Axis of
the Prism be parallel to the Perpendicular of the Triangle, the Image
_pt_ [in _Fig._ 25.] will now be form'd of equicrural Triangles _ag_,
_bh_, _ci_, _dk_, _el_, _fm_, &c. and innumerable other intermediate
ones answering to the triangular Hole in Shape and Bigness, and lying
one after another in a continual Series between two Parallel Lines _af_
and _gm_. These Triangles are a little intermingled at their Bases, but
not at their Vertices; and therefore the Light on the brighter Side _af_
of the Image, where the Bases of the Triangles are, is a little
compounded, but on the darker Side _gm_ is altogether uncompounded, and
in all Places between the Sides the Composition is proportional to the
distances of the Places from that obscurer Side _gm_. And having a
Spectrum _pt_ of such a Composition, we may try Experiments either in
its stronger and less simple Light near the Side _af_, or in its weaker
and simpler Light near the other Side _gm_, as it shall seem most
convenient.

[Illustration: FIG. 25.]

But in making Experiments of this kind, the Chamber ought to be made as
dark as can be, lest any Foreign Light mingle it self with the Light of
the Spectrum _pt_, and render it compound; especially if we would try
Experiments in the more simple Light next the Side _gm_ of the Spectrum;
which being fainter, will have a less proportion to the Foreign Light;
and so by the mixture of that Light be more troubled, and made more
compound. The Lens also ought to be good, such as may serve for optical
Uses, and the Prism ought to have a large Angle, suppose of 65 or 70
Degrees, and to be well wrought, being made of Glass free from Bubbles
and Veins, with its Sides not a little convex or concave, as usually
happens, but truly plane, and its Polish elaborate, as in working
Optick-glasses, and not such as is usually wrought with Putty, whereby
the edges of the Sand-holes being worn away, there are left all over the
Glass a numberless Company of very little convex polite Risings like
Waves. The edges also of the Prism and Lens, so far as they may make any
irregular Refraction, must be covered with a black Paper glewed on. And
all the Light of the Sun's Beam let into the Chamber, which is useless
and unprofitable to the Experiment, ought to be intercepted with black
Paper, or other black Obstacles. For otherwise the useless Light being
reflected every way in the Chamber, will mix with the oblong Spectrum,
and help to disturb it. In trying these Things, so much diligence is not
altogether necessary, but it will promote the Success of the
Experiments, and by a very scrupulous Examiner of Things deserves to be
apply'd. It's difficult to get Glass Prisms fit for this Purpose, and
therefore I used sometimes prismatick Vessels made with pieces of broken
Looking-glasses, and filled with Rain Water. And to increase the
Refraction, I sometimes impregnated the Water strongly with _Saccharum
Saturni_.


_PROP._ V. THEOR. IV.

_Homogeneal Light is refracted regularly without any Dilatation
splitting or shattering of the Rays, and the confused Vision of Objects
seen through refracting Bodies by heterogeneal Light arises from the
different Refrangibility of several sorts of Rays._

The first Part of this Proposition has been already sufficiently proved
in the fifth Experiment, and will farther appear by the Experiments
which follow.

_Exper._ 12. In the middle of a black Paper I made a round Hole about a
fifth or sixth Part of an Inch in diameter. Upon this Paper I caused the
Spectrum of homogeneal Light described in the former Proposition, so to
fall, that some part of the Light might pass through the Hole of the
Paper. This transmitted part of the Light I refracted with a Prism
placed behind the Paper, and letting this refracted Light fall
perpendicularly upon a white Paper two or three Feet distant from the
Prism, I found that the Spectrum formed on the Paper by this Light was
not oblong, as when 'tis made (in the third Experiment) by refracting
the Sun's compound Light, but was (so far as I could judge by my Eye)
perfectly circular, the Length being no greater than the Breadth. Which
shews, that this Light is refracted regularly without any Dilatation of
the Rays.

_Exper._ 13. In the homogeneal Light I placed a Paper Circle of a
quarter of an Inch in diameter, and in the Sun's unrefracted
heterogeneal white Light I placed another Paper Circle of the same
Bigness. And going from the Papers to the distance of some Feet, I
viewed both Circles through a Prism. The Circle illuminated by the Sun's
heterogeneal Light appeared very oblong, as in the fourth Experiment,
the Length being many times greater than the Breadth; but the other
Circle, illuminated with homogeneal Light, appeared circular and
distinctly defined, as when 'tis view'd with the naked Eye. Which proves
the whole Proposition.

_Exper._ 14. In the homogeneal Light I placed Flies, and such-like
minute Objects, and viewing them through a Prism, I saw their Parts as
distinctly defined, as if I had viewed them with the naked Eye. The same
Objects placed in the Sun's unrefracted heterogeneal Light, which was
white, I viewed also through a Prism, and saw them most confusedly
defined, so that I could not distinguish their smaller Parts from one
another. I placed also the Letters of a small print, one while in the
homogeneal Light, and then in the heterogeneal, and viewing them through
a Prism, they appeared in the latter Case so confused and indistinct,
that I could not read them; but in the former they appeared so distinct,
that I could read readily, and thought I saw them as distinct, as when I
view'd them with my naked Eye. In both Cases I view'd the same Objects,
through the same Prism at the same distance from me, and in the same
Situation. There was no difference, but in the Light by which the
Objects were illuminated, and which in one Case was simple, and in the
other compound; and therefore, the distinct Vision in the former Case,
and confused in the latter, could arise from nothing else than from that
difference of the Lights. Which proves the whole Proposition.

And in these three Experiments it is farther very remarkable, that the
Colour of homogeneal Light was never changed by the Refraction.


_PROP._ VI. THEOR. V.

_The Sine of Incidence of every Ray considered apart, is to its Sine of
Refraction in a given Ratio._

That every Ray consider'd apart, is constant to it self in some degree
of Refrangibility, is sufficiently manifest out of what has been said.
Those Rays, which in the first Refraction, are at equal Incidences most
refracted, are also in the following Refractions at equal Incidences
most refracted; and so of the least refrangible, and the rest which have
any mean Degree of Refrangibility, as is manifest by the fifth, sixth,
seventh, eighth, and ninth Experiments. And those which the first Time
at like Incidences are equally refracted, are again at like Incidences
equally and uniformly refracted, and that whether they be refracted
before they be separated from one another, as in the fifth Experiment,
or whether they be refracted apart, as in the twelfth, thirteenth and
fourteenth Experiments. The Refraction therefore of every Ray apart is
regular, and what Rule that Refraction observes we are now to shew.[E]

The late Writers in Opticks teach, that the Sines of Incidence are in a
given Proportion to the Sines of Refraction, as was explained in the
fifth Axiom, and some by Instruments fitted for measuring of
Refractions, or otherwise experimentally examining this Proportion, do
acquaint us that they have found it accurate. But whilst they, not
understanding the different Refrangibility of several Rays, conceived
them all to be refracted according to one and the same Proportion, 'tis
to be presumed that they adapted their Measures only to the middle of
the refracted Light; so that from their Measures we may conclude only
that the Rays which have a mean Degree of Refrangibility, that is, those
which when separated from the rest appear green, are refracted according
to a given Proportion of their Sines. And therefore we are now to shew,
that the like given Proportions obtain in all the rest. That it should
be so is very reasonable, Nature being ever conformable to her self; but
an experimental Proof is desired. And such a Proof will be had, if we
can shew that the Sines of Refraction of Rays differently refrangible
are one to another in a given Proportion when their Sines of Incidence
are equal. For, if the Sines of Refraction of all the Rays are in given
Proportions to the Sine of Refractions of a Ray which has a mean Degree
of Refrangibility, and this Sine is in a given Proportion to the equal
Sines of Incidence, those other Sines of Refraction will also be in
given Proportions to the equal Sines of Incidence. Now, when the Sines
of Incidence are equal, it will appear by the following Experiment, that
the Sines of Refraction are in a given Proportion to one another.

[Illustration: FIG. 26.]

_Exper._ 15. The Sun shining into a dark Chamber through a little round
Hole in the Window-shut, let S [in _Fig._ 26.] represent his round white
Image painted on the opposite Wall by his direct Light, PT his oblong
coloured Image made by refracting that Light with a Prism placed at the
Window; and _pt_, or _2p 2t_, _3p 3t_, his oblong colour'd Image made by
refracting again the same Light sideways with a second Prism placed
immediately after the first in a cross Position to it, as was explained
in the fifth Experiment; that is to say, _pt_ when the Refraction of the
second Prism is small, _2p 2t_ when its Refraction is greater, and _3p
3t_ when it is greatest. For such will be the diversity of the
Refractions, if the refracting Angle of the second Prism be of various
Magnitudes; suppose of fifteen or twenty Degrees to make the Image _pt_,
of thirty or forty to make the Image _2p 2t_, and of sixty to make the
Image _3p 3t_. But for want of solid Glass Prisms with Angles of
convenient Bignesses, there may be Vessels made of polished Plates of
Glass cemented together in the form of Prisms and filled with Water.
These things being thus ordered, I observed that all the solar Images or
coloured Spectrums PT, _pt_, _2p 2t_, _3p 3t_ did very nearly converge
to the place S on which the direct Light of the Sun fell and painted his
white round Image when the Prisms were taken away. The Axis of the
Spectrum PT, that is the Line drawn through the middle of it parallel to
its rectilinear Sides, did when produced pass exactly through the middle
of that white round Image S. And when the Refraction of the second Prism
was equal to the Refraction of the first, the refracting Angles of them
both being about 60 Degrees, the Axis of the Spectrum _3p 3t_ made by
that Refraction, did when produced pass also through the middle of the
same white round Image S. But when the Refraction of the second Prism
was less than that of the first, the produced Axes of the Spectrums _tp_
or _2t 2p_ made by that Refraction did cut the produced Axis of the
Spectrum TP in the points _m_ and _n_, a little beyond the Center of
that white round Image S. Whence the proportion of the Line 3_t_T to the
Line 3_p_P was a little greater than the Proportion of 2_t_T or 2_p_P,
and this Proportion a little greater than that of _t_T to _p_P. Now when
the Light of the Spectrum PT falls perpendicularly upon the Wall, those
Lines 3_t_T, 3_p_P, and 2_t_T, and 2_p_P, and _t_T, _p_P, are the
Tangents of the Refractions, and therefore by this Experiment the
Proportions of the Tangents of the Refractions are obtained, from whence
the Proportions of the Sines being derived, they come out equal, so far
as by viewing the Spectrums, and using some mathematical Reasoning I
could estimate. For I did not make an accurate Computation. So then the
Proposition holds true in every Ray apart, so far as appears by
Experiment. And that it is accurately true, may be demonstrated upon
this Supposition. _That Bodies refract Light by acting upon its Rays in
Lines perpendicular to their Surfaces._ But in order to this
Demonstration, I must distinguish the Motion of every Ray into two
Motions, the one perpendicular to the refracting Surface, the other
parallel to it, and concerning the perpendicular Motion lay down the
following Proposition.

If any Motion or moving thing whatsoever be incident with any Velocity
on any broad and thin space terminated on both sides by two parallel
Planes, and in its Passage through that space be urged perpendicularly
towards the farther Plane by any force which at given distances from the
Plane is of given Quantities; the perpendicular velocity of that Motion
or Thing, at its emerging out of that space, shall be always equal to
the square Root of the sum of the square of the perpendicular velocity
of that Motion or Thing at its Incidence on that space; and of the
square of the perpendicular velocity which that Motion or Thing would
have at its Emergence, if at its Incidence its perpendicular velocity
was infinitely little.

And the same Proposition holds true of any Motion or Thing
perpendicularly retarded in its passage through that space, if instead
of the sum of the two Squares you take their difference. The
Demonstration Mathematicians will easily find out, and therefore I shall
not trouble the Reader with it.

Suppose now that a Ray coming most obliquely in the Line MC [in _Fig._
1.] be refracted at C by the Plane RS into the Line CN, and if it be
required to find the Line CE, into which any other Ray AC shall be
refracted; let MC, AD, be the Sines of Incidence of the two Rays, and
NG, EF, their Sines of Refraction, and let the equal Motions of the
incident Rays be represented by the equal Lines MC and AC, and the
Motion MC being considered as parallel to the refracting Plane, let the
other Motion AC be distinguished into two Motions AD and DC, one of
which AD is parallel, and the other DC perpendicular to the refracting
Surface. In like manner, let the Motions of the emerging Rays be
distinguish'd into two, whereof the perpendicular ones are MC/NG × CG
and AD/EF × CF. And if the force of the refracting Plane begins to act
upon the Rays either in that Plane or at a certain distance from it on
the one side, and ends at a certain distance from it on the other side,
and in all places between those two limits acts upon the Rays in Lines
perpendicular to that refracting Plane, and the Actions upon the Rays at
equal distances from the refracting Plane be equal, and at unequal ones
either equal or unequal according to any rate whatever; that Motion of
the Ray which is parallel to the refracting Plane, will suffer no
Alteration by that Force; and that Motion which is perpendicular to it
will be altered according to the rule of the foregoing Proposition. If
therefore for the perpendicular velocity of the emerging Ray CN you
write MC/NG × CG as above, then the perpendicular velocity of any other
emerging Ray CE which was AD/EF × CF, will be equal to the square Root
of CD_q_ + (_MCq/NGq_ × CG_q_). And by squaring these Equals, and adding
to them the Equals AD_q_ and MC_q_ - CD_q_, and dividing the Sums by the
Equals CF_q_ + EF_q_ and CG_q_ + NG_q_, you will have _MCq/NGq_ equal to
_ADq/EFq_. Whence AD, the Sine of Incidence, is to EF the Sine of
Refraction, as MC to NG, that is, in a given _ratio_. And this
Demonstration being general, without determining what Light is, or by
what kind of Force it is refracted, or assuming any thing farther than
that the refracting Body acts upon the Rays in Lines perpendicular to
its Surface; I take it to be a very convincing Argument of the full
truth of this Proposition.

So then, if the _ratio_ of the Sines of Incidence and Refraction of any
sort of Rays be found in any one case, 'tis given in all cases; and this
may be readily found by the Method in the following Proposition.


_PROP._ VII. THEOR. VI.

_The Perfection of Telescopes is impeded by the different Refrangibility
of the Rays of Light._

The Imperfection of Telescopes is vulgarly attributed to the spherical
Figures of the Glasses, and therefore Mathematicians have propounded to
figure them by the conical Sections. To shew that they are mistaken, I
have inserted this Proposition; the truth of which will appear by the
measure of the Refractions of the several sorts of Rays; and these
measures I thus determine.

In the third Experiment of this first Part, where the refracting Angle
of the Prism was 62-1/2 Degrees, the half of that Angle 31 deg. 15 min.
is the Angle of Incidence of the Rays at their going out of the Glass
into the Air[F]; and the Sine of this Angle is 5188, the Radius being
10000. When the Axis of this Prism was parallel to the Horizon, and the
Refraction of the Rays at their Incidence on this Prism equal to that at
their Emergence out of it, I observed with a Quadrant the Angle which
the mean refrangible Rays, (that is those which went to the middle of
the Sun's coloured Image) made with the Horizon, and by this Angle and
the Sun's altitude observed at the same time, I found the Angle which
the emergent Rays contained with the incident to be 44 deg. and 40 min.
and the half of this Angle added to the Angle of Incidence 31 deg. 15
min. makes the Angle of Refraction, which is therefore 53 deg. 35 min.
and its Sine 8047. These are the Sines of Incidence and Refraction of
the mean refrangible Rays, and their Proportion in round Numbers is 20
to 31. This Glass was of a Colour inclining to green. The last of the
Prisms mentioned in the third Experiment was of clear white Glass. Its
refracting Angle 63-1/2 Degrees. The Angle which the emergent Rays
contained, with the incident 45 deg. 50 min. The Sine of half the first
Angle 5262. The Sine of half the Sum of the Angles 8157. And their
Proportion in round Numbers 20 to 31, as before.

From the Length of the Image, which was about 9-3/4 or 10 Inches,
subduct its Breadth, which was 2-1/8 Inches, and the Remainder 7-3/4
Inches would be the Length of the Image were the Sun but a Point, and
therefore subtends the Angle which the most and least refrangible Rays,
when incident on the Prism in the same Lines, do contain with one
another after their Emergence. Whence this Angle is 2 deg. 0´. 7´´. For
the distance between the Image and the Prism where this Angle is made,
was 18-1/2 Feet, and at that distance the Chord 7-3/4 Inches subtends an
Angle of 2 deg. 0´. 7´´. Now half this Angle is the Angle which these
emergent Rays contain with the emergent mean refrangible Rays, and a
quarter thereof, that is 30´. 2´´. may be accounted the Angle which they
would contain with the same emergent mean refrangible Rays, were they
co-incident to them within the Glass, and suffered no other Refraction
than that at their Emergence. For, if two equal Refractions, the one at
the Incidence of the Rays on the Prism, the other at their Emergence,
make half the Angle 2 deg. 0´. 7´´. then one of those Refractions will
make about a quarter of that Angle, and this quarter added to, and
subducted from the Angle of Refraction of the mean refrangible Rays,
which was 53 deg. 35´, gives the Angles of Refraction of the most and
least refrangible Rays 54 deg. 5´ 2´´, and 53 deg. 4´ 58´´, whose Sines
are 8099 and 7995, the common Angle of Incidence being 31 deg. 15´, and
its Sine 5188; and these Sines in the least round Numbers are in
proportion to one another, as 78 and 77 to 50.

Now, if you subduct the common Sine of Incidence 50 from the Sines of
Refraction 77 and 78, the Remainders 27 and 28 shew, that in small
Refractions the Refraction of the least refrangible Rays is to the
Refraction of the most refrangible ones, as 27 to 28 very nearly, and
that the difference of the Refractions of the least refrangible and most
refrangible Rays is about the 27-1/2th Part of the whole Refraction of
the mean refrangible Rays.

Whence they that are skilled in Opticks will easily understand,[G] that
the Breadth of the least circular Space, into which Object-glasses of
Telescopes can collect all sorts of Parallel Rays, is about the 27-1/2th
Part of half the Aperture of the Glass, or 55th Part of the whole
Aperture; and that the Focus of the most refrangible Rays is nearer to
the Object-glass than the Focus of the least refrangible ones, by about
the 27-1/2th Part of the distance between the Object-glass and the Focus
of the mean refrangible ones.

And if Rays of all sorts, flowing from any one lucid Point in the Axis
of any convex Lens, be made by the Refraction of the Lens to converge to
Points not too remote from the Lens, the Focus of the most refrangible
Rays shall be nearer to the Lens than the Focus of the least refrangible
ones, by a distance which is to the 27-1/2th Part of the distance of the
Focus of the mean refrangible Rays from the Lens, as the distance
between that Focus and the lucid Point, from whence the Rays flow, is to
the distance between that lucid Point and the Lens very nearly.

Now to examine whether the Difference between the Refractions, which the
most refrangible and the least refrangible Rays flowing from the same
Point suffer in the Object-glasses of Telescopes and such-like Glasses,
be so great as is here described, I contrived the following Experiment.

_Exper._ 16. The Lens which I used in the second and eighth Experiments,
being placed six Feet and an Inch distant from any Object, collected the
Species of that Object by the mean refrangible Rays at the distance of
six Feet and an Inch from the Lens on the other side. And therefore by
the foregoing Rule, it ought to collect the Species of that Object by
the least refrangible Rays at the distance of six Feet and 3-2/3 Inches
from the Lens, and by the most refrangible ones at the distance of five
Feet and 10-1/3 Inches from it: So that between the two Places, where
these least and most refrangible Rays collect the Species, there may be
the distance of about 5-1/3 Inches. For by that Rule, as six Feet and an
Inch (the distance of the Lens from the lucid Object) is to twelve Feet
and two Inches (the distance of the lucid Object from the Focus of the
mean refrangible Rays) that is, as One is to Two; so is the 27-1/2th
Part of six Feet and an Inch (the distance between the Lens and the same
Focus) to the distance between the Focus of the most refrangible Rays
and the Focus of the least refrangible ones, which is therefore 5-17/55
Inches, that is very nearly 5-1/3 Inches. Now to know whether this
Measure was true, I repeated the second and eighth Experiment with
coloured Light, which was less compounded than that I there made use of:
For I now separated the heterogeneous Rays from one another by the
Method I described in the eleventh Experiment, so as to make a coloured
Spectrum about twelve or fifteen Times longer than broad. This Spectrum
I cast on a printed Book, and placing the above-mentioned Lens at the
distance of six Feet and an Inch from this Spectrum to collect the
Species of the illuminated Letters at the same distance on the other
side, I found that the Species of the Letters illuminated with blue were
nearer to the Lens than those illuminated with deep red by about three
Inches, or three and a quarter; but the Species of the Letters
illuminated with indigo and violet appeared so confused and indistinct,
that I could not read them: Whereupon viewing the Prism, I found it was
full of Veins running from one end of the Glass to the other; so that
the Refraction could not be regular. I took another Prism therefore
which was free from Veins, and instead of the Letters I used two or
three Parallel black Lines a little broader than the Strokes of the
Letters, and casting the Colours upon these Lines in such manner, that
the Lines ran along the Colours from one end of the Spectrum to the
other, I found that the Focus where the indigo, or confine of this
Colour and violet cast the Species of the black Lines most distinctly,
to be about four Inches, or 4-1/4 nearer to the Lens than the Focus,
where the deepest red cast the Species of the same black Lines most
distinctly. The violet was so faint and dark, that I could not discern
the Species of the Lines distinctly by that Colour; and therefore
considering that the Prism was made of a dark coloured Glass inclining
to green, I took another Prism of clear white Glass; but the Spectrum of
Colours which this Prism made had long white Streams of faint Light
shooting out from both ends of the Colours, which made me conclude that
something was amiss; and viewing the Prism, I found two or three little
Bubbles in the Glass, which refracted the Light irregularly. Wherefore I
covered that Part of the Glass with black Paper, and letting the Light
pass through another Part of it which was free from such Bubbles, the
Spectrum of Colours became free from those irregular Streams of Light,
and was now such as I desired. But still I found the violet so dark and
faint, that I could scarce see the Species of the Lines by the violet,
and not at all by the deepest Part of it, which was next the end of the
Spectrum. I suspected therefore, that this faint and dark Colour might
be allayed by that scattering Light which was refracted, and reflected
irregularly, partly by some very small Bubbles in the Glasses, and
partly by the Inequalities of their Polish; which Light, tho' it was but
little, yet it being of a white Colour, might suffice to affect the
Sense so strongly as to disturb the Phænomena of that weak and dark
Colour the violet, and therefore I tried, as in the 12th, 13th, and 14th
Experiments, whether the Light of this Colour did not consist of a
sensible Mixture of heterogeneous Rays, but found it did not. Nor did
the Refractions cause any other sensible Colour than violet to emerge
out of this Light, as they would have done out of white Light, and by
consequence out of this violet Light had it been sensibly compounded
with white Light. And therefore I concluded, that the reason why I could
not see the Species of the Lines distinctly by this Colour, was only
the Darkness of this Colour, and Thinness of its Light, and its distance
from the Axis of the Lens; I divided therefore those Parallel black
Lines into equal Parts, by which I might readily know the distances of
the Colours in the Spectrum from one another, and noted the distances of
the Lens from the Foci of such Colours, as cast the Species of the Lines
distinctly, and then considered whether the difference of those
distances bear such proportion to 5-1/3 Inches, the greatest Difference
of the distances, which the Foci of the deepest red and violet ought to
have from the Lens, as the distance of the observed Colours from one
another in the Spectrum bear to the greatest distance of the deepest red
and violet measured in the Rectilinear Sides of the Spectrum, that is,
to the Length of those Sides, or Excess of the Length of the Spectrum
above its Breadth. And my Observations were as follows.

When I observed and compared the deepest sensible red, and the Colour in
the Confine of green and blue, which at the Rectilinear Sides of the
Spectrum was distant from it half the Length of those Sides, the Focus
where the Confine of green and blue cast the Species of the Lines
distinctly on the Paper, was nearer to the Lens than the Focus, where
the red cast those Lines distinctly on it by about 2-1/2 or 2-3/4
Inches. For sometimes the Measures were a little greater, sometimes a
little less, but seldom varied from one another above 1/3 of an Inch.
For it was very difficult to define the Places of the Foci, without some
little Errors. Now, if the Colours distant half the Length of the
Image, (measured at its Rectilinear Sides) give 2-1/2 or 2-3/4
Difference of the distances of their Foci from the Lens, then the
Colours distant the whole Length ought to give 5 or 5-1/2 Inches
difference of those distances.

But here it's to be noted, that I could not see the red to the full end
of the Spectrum, but only to the Center of the Semicircle which bounded
that end, or a little farther; and therefore I compared this red not
with that Colour which was exactly in the middle of the Spectrum, or
Confine of green and blue, but with that which verged a little more to
the blue than to the green: And as I reckoned the whole Length of the
Colours not to be the whole Length of the Spectrum, but the Length of
its Rectilinear Sides, so compleating the semicircular Ends into
Circles, when either of the observed Colours fell within those Circles,
I measured the distance of that Colour from the semicircular End of the
Spectrum, and subducting half this distance from the measured distance
of the two Colours, I took the Remainder for their corrected distance;
and in these Observations set down this corrected distance for the
difference of the distances of their Foci from the Lens. For, as the
Length of the Rectilinear Sides of the Spectrum would be the whole
Length of all the Colours, were the Circles of which (as we shewed) that
Spectrum consists contracted and reduced to Physical Points, so in that
Case this corrected distance would be the real distance of the two
observed Colours.

When therefore I farther observed the deepest sensible red, and that
blue whose corrected distance from it was 7/12 Parts of the Length of
the Rectilinear Sides of the Spectrum, the difference of the distances
of their Foci from the Lens was about 3-1/4 Inches, and as 7 to 12, so
is 3-1/4 to 5-4/7.

When I observed the deepest sensible red, and that indigo whose
corrected distance was 8/12 or 2/3 of the Length of the Rectilinear
Sides of the Spectrum, the difference of the distances of their Foci
from the Lens, was about 3-2/3 Inches, and as 2 to 3, so is 3-2/3 to
5-1/2.

When I observed the deepest sensible red, and that deep indigo whose
corrected distance from one another was 9/12 or 3/4 of the Length of the
Rectilinear Sides of the Spectrum, the difference of the distances of
their Foci from the Lens was about 4 Inches; and as 3 to 4, so is 4 to
5-1/3.

When I observed the deepest sensible red, and that Part of the violet
next the indigo, whose corrected distance from the red was 10/12 or 5/6
of the Length of the Rectilinear Sides of the Spectrum, the difference
of the distances of their Foci from the Lens was about 4-1/2 Inches, and
as 5 to 6, so is 4-1/2 to 5-2/5. For sometimes, when the Lens was
advantageously placed, so that its Axis respected the blue, and all
Things else were well ordered, and the Sun shone clear, and I held my
Eye very near to the Paper on which the Lens cast the Species of the
Lines, I could see pretty distinctly the Species of those Lines by that
Part of the violet which was next the indigo; and sometimes I could see
them by above half the violet, For in making these Experiments I had
observed, that the Species of those Colours only appear distinct, which
were in or near the Axis of the Lens: So that if the blue or indigo were
in the Axis, I could see their Species distinctly; and then the red
appeared much less distinct than before. Wherefore I contrived to make
the Spectrum of Colours shorter than before, so that both its Ends might
be nearer to the Axis of the Lens. And now its Length was about 2-1/2
Inches, and Breadth about 1/5 or 1/6 of an Inch. Also instead of the
black Lines on which the Spectrum was cast, I made one black Line
broader than those, that I might see its Species more easily; and this
Line I divided by short cross Lines into equal Parts, for measuring the
distances of the observed Colours. And now I could sometimes see the
Species of this Line with its Divisions almost as far as the Center of
the semicircular violet End of the Spectrum, and made these farther
Observations.

When I observed the deepest sensible red, and that Part of the violet,
whose corrected distance from it was about 8/9 Parts of the Rectilinear
Sides of the Spectrum, the Difference of the distances of the Foci of
those Colours from the Lens, was one time 4-2/3, another time 4-3/4,
another time 4-7/8 Inches; and as 8 to 9, so are 4-2/3, 4-3/4, 4-7/8, to
5-1/4, 5-11/32, 5-31/64 respectively.

When I observed the deepest sensible red, and deepest sensible violet,
(the corrected distance of which Colours, when all Things were ordered
to the best Advantage, and the Sun shone very clear, was about 11/12 or
15/16 Parts of the Length of the Rectilinear Sides of the coloured
Spectrum) I found the Difference of the distances of their Foci from the
Lens sometimes 4-3/4 sometimes 5-1/4, and for the most part 5 Inches or
thereabouts; and as 11 to 12, or 15 to 16, so is five Inches to 5-2/2 or
5-1/3 Inches.

And by this Progression of Experiments I satisfied my self, that had the
Light at the very Ends of the Spectrum been strong enough to make the
Species of the black Lines appear plainly on the Paper, the Focus of the
deepest violet would have been found nearer to the Lens, than the Focus
of the deepest red, by about 5-1/3 Inches at least. And this is a
farther Evidence, that the Sines of Incidence and Refraction of the
several sorts of Rays, hold the same Proportion to one another in the
smallest Refractions which they do in the greatest.

My Progress in making this nice and troublesome Experiment I have set
down more at large, that they that shall try it after me may be aware of
the Circumspection requisite to make it succeed well. And if they cannot
make it succeed so well as I did, they may notwithstanding collect by
the Proportion of the distance of the Colours of the Spectrum, to the
Difference of the distances of their Foci from the Lens, what would be
the Success in the more distant Colours by a better trial. And yet, if
they use a broader Lens than I did, and fix it to a long strait Staff,
by means of which it may be readily and truly directed to the Colour
whose Focus is desired, I question not but the Experiment will succeed
better with them than it did with me. For I directed the Axis as nearly
as I could to the middle of the Colours, and then the faint Ends of the
Spectrum being remote from the Axis, cast their Species less distinctly
on the Paper than they would have done, had the Axis been successively
directed to them.

Now by what has been said, it's certain that the Rays which differ in
Refrangibility do not converge to the same Focus; but if they flow from
a lucid Point, as far from the Lens on one side as their Foci are on the
other, the Focus of the most refrangible Rays shall be nearer to the
Lens than that of the least refrangible, by above the fourteenth Part of
the whole distance; and if they flow from a lucid Point, so very remote
from the Lens, that before their Incidence they may be accounted
parallel, the Focus of the most refrangible Rays shall be nearer to the
Lens than the Focus of the least refrangible, by about the 27th or 28th
Part of their whole distance from it. And the Diameter of the Circle in
the middle Space between those two Foci which they illuminate, when they
fall there on any Plane, perpendicular to the Axis (which Circle is the
least into which they can all be gathered) is about the 55th Part of the
Diameter of the Aperture of the Glass. So that 'tis a wonder, that
Telescopes represent Objects so distinct as they do. But were all the
Rays of Light equally refrangible, the Error arising only from the
Sphericalness of the Figures of Glasses would be many hundred times
less. For, if the Object-glass of a Telescope be Plano-convex, and the
Plane side be turned towards the Object, and the Diameter of the
Sphere, whereof this Glass is a Segment, be called D, and the
Semi-diameter of the Aperture of the Glass be called S, and the Sine of
Incidence out of Glass into Air, be to the Sine of Refraction as I to R;
the Rays which come parallel to the Axis of the Glass, shall in the
Place where the Image of the Object is most distinctly made, be
scattered all over a little Circle, whose Diameter is _(Rq/Iq) × (S
cub./D quad.)_ very nearly,[H] as I gather by computing the Errors of
the Rays by the Method of infinite Series, and rejecting the Terms,
whose Quantities are inconsiderable. As for instance, if the Sine of
Incidence I, be to the Sine of Refraction R, as 20 to 31, and if D the
Diameter of the Sphere, to which the Convex-side of the Glass is ground,
be 100 Feet or 1200 Inches, and S the Semi-diameter of the Aperture be
two Inches, the Diameter of the little Circle, (that is (_Rq × S
cub.)/(Iq × D quad._)) will be (31 × 31 × 8)/(20 × 20 × 1200 × 1200) (or
961/72000000) Parts of an Inch. But the Diameter of the little Circle,
through which these Rays are scattered by unequal Refrangibility, will
be about the 55th Part of the Aperture of the Object-glass, which here
is four Inches. And therefore, the Error arising from the Spherical
Figure of the Glass, is to the Error arising from the different
Refrangibility of the Rays, as 961/72000000 to 4/55, that is as 1 to
5449; and therefore being in comparison so very little, deserves not to
be considered.

[Illustration: FIG. 27.]

But you will say, if the Errors caused by the different Refrangibility
be so very great, how comes it to pass, that Objects appear through
Telescopes so distinct as they do? I answer, 'tis because the erring
Rays are not scattered uniformly over all that Circular Space, but
collected infinitely more densely in the Center than in any other Part
of the Circle, and in the Way from the Center to the Circumference, grow
continually rarer and rarer, so as at the Circumference to become
infinitely rare; and by reason of their Rarity are not strong enough to
be visible, unless in the Center and very near it. Let ADE [in _Fig._
27.] represent one of those Circles described with the Center C, and
Semi-diameter AC, and let BFG be a smaller Circle concentrick to the
former, cutting with its Circumference the Diameter AC in B, and bisect
AC in N; and by my reckoning, the Density of the Light in any Place B,
will be to its Density in N, as AB to BC; and the whole Light within the
lesser Circle BFG, will be to the whole Light within the greater AED, as
the Excess of the Square of AC above the Square of AB, is to the Square
of AC. As if BC be the fifth Part of AC, the Light will be four times
denser in B than in N, and the whole Light within the less Circle, will
be to the whole Light within the greater, as nine to twenty-five. Whence
it's evident, that the Light within the less Circle, must strike the
Sense much more strongly, than that faint and dilated Light round about
between it and the Circumference of the greater.

But it's farther to be noted, that the most luminous of the Prismatick
Colours are the yellow and orange. These affect the Senses more strongly
than all the rest together, and next to these in strength are the red
and green. The blue compared with these is a faint and dark Colour, and
the indigo and violet are much darker and fainter, so that these
compared with the stronger Colours are little to be regarded. The Images
of Objects are therefore to be placed, not in the Focus of the mean
refrangible Rays, which are in the Confine of green and blue, but in the
Focus of those Rays which are in the middle of the orange and yellow;
there where the Colour is most luminous and fulgent, that is in the
brightest yellow, that yellow which inclines more to orange than to
green. And by the Refraction of these Rays (whose Sines of Incidence and
Refraction in Glass are as 17 and 11) the Refraction of Glass and
Crystal for Optical Uses is to be measured. Let us therefore place the
Image of the Object in the Focus of these Rays, and all the yellow and
orange will fall within a Circle, whose Diameter is about the 250th
Part of the Diameter of the Aperture of the Glass. And if you add the
brighter half of the red, (that half which is next the orange) and the
brighter half of the green, (that half which is next the yellow) about
three fifth Parts of the Light of these two Colours will fall within the
same Circle, and two fifth Parts will fall without it round about; and
that which falls without will be spread through almost as much more
space as that which falls within, and so in the gross be almost three
times rarer. Of the other half of the red and green, (that is of the
deep dark red and willow green) about one quarter will fall within this
Circle, and three quarters without, and that which falls without will be
spread through about four or five times more space than that which falls
within; and so in the gross be rarer, and if compared with the whole
Light within it, will be about 25 times rarer than all that taken in the
gross; or rather more than 30 or 40 times rarer, because the deep red in
the end of the Spectrum of Colours made by a Prism is very thin and
rare, and the willow green is something rarer than the orange and
yellow. The Light of these Colours therefore being so very much rarer
than that within the Circle, will scarce affect the Sense, especially
since the deep red and willow green of this Light, are much darker
Colours than the rest. And for the same reason the blue and violet being
much darker Colours than these, and much more rarified, may be
neglected. For the dense and bright Light of the Circle, will obscure
the rare and weak Light of these dark Colours round about it, and
render them almost insensible. The sensible Image of a lucid Point is
therefore scarce broader than a Circle, whose Diameter is the 250th Part
of the Diameter of the Aperture of the Object-glass of a good Telescope,
or not much broader, if you except a faint and dark misty Light round
about it, which a Spectator will scarce regard. And therefore in a
Telescope, whose Aperture is four Inches, and Length an hundred Feet, it
exceeds not 2´´ 45´´´, or 3´´. And in a Telescope whose Aperture is two
Inches, and Length 20 or 30 Feet, it may be 5´´ or 6´´, and scarce
above. And this answers well to Experience: For some Astronomers have
found the Diameters of the fix'd Stars, in Telescopes of between 20 and
60 Feet in length, to be about 5´´ or 6´´, or at most 8´´ or 10´´ in
diameter. But if the Eye-Glass be tincted faintly with the Smoak of a
Lamp or Torch, to obscure the Light of the Star, the fainter Light in
the Circumference of the Star ceases to be visible, and the Star (if the
Glass be sufficiently soiled with Smoak) appears something more like a
mathematical Point. And for the same Reason, the enormous Part of the
Light in the Circumference of every lucid Point ought to be less
discernible in shorter Telescopes than in longer, because the shorter
transmit less Light to the Eye.

Now, that the fix'd Stars, by reason of their immense Distance, appear
like Points, unless so far as their Light is dilated by Refraction, may
appear from hence; that when the Moon passes over them and eclipses
them, their Light vanishes, not gradually like that of the Planets, but
all at once; and in the end of the Eclipse it returns into Sight all at
once, or certainly in less time than the second of a Minute; the
Refraction of the Moon's Atmosphere a little protracting the time in
which the Light of the Star first vanishes, and afterwards returns into
Sight.

Now, if we suppose the sensible Image of a lucid Point, to be even 250
times narrower than the Aperture of the Glass; yet this Image would be
still much greater than if it were only from the spherical Figure of the
Glass. For were it not for the different Refrangibility of the Rays, its
breadth in an 100 Foot Telescope whose aperture is 4 Inches, would be
but 961/72000000 parts of an Inch, as is manifest by the foregoing
Computation. And therefore in this case the greatest Errors arising from
the spherical Figure of the Glass, would be to the greatest sensible
Errors arising from the different Refrangibility of the Rays as
961/72000000 to 4/250 at most, that is only as 1 to 1200. And this
sufficiently shews that it is not the spherical Figures of Glasses, but
the different Refrangibility of the Rays which hinders the perfection of
Telescopes.

There is another Argument by which it may appear that the different
Refrangibility of Rays, is the true cause of the imperfection of
Telescopes. For the Errors of the Rays arising from the spherical
Figures of Object-glasses, are as the Cubes of the Apertures of the
Object Glasses; and thence to make Telescopes of various Lengths magnify
with equal distinctness, the Apertures of the Object-glasses, and the
Charges or magnifying Powers ought to be as the Cubes of the square
Roots of their lengths; which doth not answer to Experience. But the
Errors of the Rays arising from the different Refrangibility, are as the
Apertures of the Object-glasses; and thence to make Telescopes of
various lengths, magnify with equal distinctness, their Apertures and
Charges ought to be as the square Roots of their lengths; and this
answers to Experience, as is well known. For Instance, a Telescope of 64
Feet in length, with an Aperture of 2-2/3 Inches, magnifies about 120
times, with as much distinctness as one of a Foot in length, with 1/3 of
an Inch aperture, magnifies 15 times.

[Illustration: FIG. 28.]

Now were it not for this different Refrangibility of Rays, Telescopes
might be brought to a greater perfection than we have yet describ'd, by
composing the Object-glass of two Glasses with Water between them. Let
ADFC [in _Fig._ 28.] represent the Object-glass composed of two Glasses
ABED and BEFC, alike convex on the outsides AGD and CHF, and alike
concave on the insides BME, BNE, with Water in the concavity BMEN. Let
the Sine of Incidence out of Glass into Air be as I to R, and out of
Water into Air, as K to R, and by consequence out of Glass into Water,
as I to K: and let the Diameter of the Sphere to which the convex sides
AGD and CHF are ground be D, and the Diameter of the Sphere to which the
concave sides BME and BNE, are ground be to D, as the Cube Root of
KK--KI to the Cube Root of RK--RI: and the Refractions on the concave
sides of the Glasses, will very much correct the Errors of the
Refractions on the convex sides, so far as they arise from the
sphericalness of the Figure. And by this means might Telescopes be
brought to sufficient perfection, were it not for the different
Refrangibility of several sorts of Rays. But by reason of this different
Refrangibility, I do not yet see any other means of improving Telescopes
by Refractions alone, than that of increasing their lengths, for which
end the late Contrivance of _Hugenius_ seems well accommodated. For very
long Tubes are cumbersome, and scarce to be readily managed, and by
reason of their length are very apt to bend, and shake by bending, so as
to cause a continual trembling in the Objects, whereby it becomes
difficult to see them distinctly: whereas by his Contrivance the Glasses
are readily manageable, and the Object-glass being fix'd upon a strong
upright Pole becomes more steady.

Seeing therefore the Improvement of Telescopes of given lengths by
Refractions is desperate; I contrived heretofore a Perspective by
Reflexion, using instead of an Object-glass a concave Metal. The
diameter of the Sphere to which the Metal was ground concave was about
25 _English_ Inches, and by consequence the length of the Instrument
about six Inches and a quarter. The Eye-glass was Plano-convex, and the
diameter of the Sphere to which the convex side was ground was about 1/5
of an Inch, or a little less, and by consequence it magnified between 30
and 40 times. By another way of measuring I found that it magnified
about 35 times. The concave Metal bore an Aperture of an Inch and a
third part; but the Aperture was limited not by an opake Circle,
covering the Limb of the Metal round about, but by an opake Circle
placed between the Eyeglass and the Eye, and perforated in the middle
with a little round hole for the Rays to pass through to the Eye. For
this Circle by being placed here, stopp'd much of the erroneous Light,
which otherwise would have disturbed the Vision. By comparing it with a
pretty good Perspective of four Feet in length, made with a concave
Eye-glass, I could read at a greater distance with my own Instrument
than with the Glass. Yet Objects appeared much darker in it than in the
Glass, and that partly because more Light was lost by Reflexion in the
Metal, than by Refraction in the Glass, and partly because my Instrument
was overcharged. Had it magnified but 30 or 25 times, it would have made
the Object appear more brisk and pleasant. Two of these I made about 16
Years ago, and have one of them still by me, by which I can prove the
truth of what I write. Yet it is not so good as at the first. For the
concave has been divers times tarnished and cleared again, by rubbing
it with very soft Leather. When I made these an Artist in _London_
undertook to imitate it; but using another way of polishing them than I
did, he fell much short of what I had attained to, as I afterwards
understood by discoursing the Under-workman he had employed. The Polish
I used was in this manner. I had two round Copper Plates, each six
Inches in Diameter, the one convex, the other concave, ground very true
to one another. On the convex I ground the Object-Metal or Concave which
was to be polish'd, 'till it had taken the Figure of the Convex and was
ready for a Polish. Then I pitched over the convex very thinly, by
dropping melted Pitch upon it, and warming it to keep the Pitch soft,
whilst I ground it with the concave Copper wetted to make it spread
eavenly all over the convex. Thus by working it well I made it as thin
as a Groat, and after the convex was cold I ground it again to give it
as true a Figure as I could. Then I took Putty which I had made very
fine by washing it from all its grosser Particles, and laying a little
of this upon the Pitch, I ground it upon the Pitch with the concave
Copper, till it had done making a Noise; and then upon the Pitch I
ground the Object-Metal with a brisk motion, for about two or three
Minutes of time, leaning hard upon it. Then I put fresh Putty upon the
Pitch, and ground it again till it had done making a noise, and
afterwards ground the Object-Metal upon it as before. And this Work I
repeated till the Metal was polished, grinding it the last time with all
my strength for a good while together, and frequently breathing upon
the Pitch, to keep it moist without laying on any more fresh Putty. The
Object-Metal was two Inches broad, and about one third part of an Inch
thick, to keep it from bending. I had two of these Metals, and when I
had polished them both, I tried which was best, and ground the other
again, to see if I could make it better than that which I kept. And thus
by many Trials I learn'd the way of polishing, till I made those two
reflecting Perspectives I spake of above. For this Art of polishing will
be better learn'd by repeated Practice than by my Description. Before I
ground the Object-Metal on the Pitch, I always ground the Putty on it
with the concave Copper, till it had done making a noise, because if the
Particles of the Putty were not by this means made to stick fast in the
Pitch, they would by rolling up and down grate and fret the Object-Metal
and fill it full of little holes.

But because Metal is more difficult to polish than Glass, and is
afterwards very apt to be spoiled by tarnishing, and reflects not so
much Light as Glass quick-silver'd over does: I would propound to use
instead of the Metal, a Glass ground concave on the foreside, and as
much convex on the backside, and quick-silver'd over on the convex side.
The Glass must be every where of the same thickness exactly. Otherwise
it will make Objects look colour'd and indistinct. By such a Glass I
tried about five or six Years ago to make a reflecting Telescope of four
Feet in length to magnify about 150 times, and I satisfied my self that
there wants nothing but a good Artist to bring the Design to
perfection. For the Glass being wrought by one of our _London_ Artists
after such a manner as they grind Glasses for Telescopes, though it
seemed as well wrought as the Object-glasses use to be, yet when it was
quick-silver'd, the Reflexion discovered innumerable Inequalities all
over the Glass. And by reason of these Inequalities, Objects appeared
indistinct in this Instrument. For the Errors of reflected Rays caused
by any Inequality of the Glass, are about six times greater than the
Errors of refracted Rays caused by the like Inequalities. Yet by this
Experiment I satisfied my self that the Reflexion on the concave side of
the Glass, which I feared would disturb the Vision, did no sensible
prejudice to it, and by consequence that nothing is wanting to perfect
these Telescopes, but good Workmen who can grind and polish Glasses
truly spherical. An Object-glass of a fourteen Foot Telescope, made by
an Artificer at _London_, I once mended considerably, by grinding it on
Pitch with Putty, and leaning very easily on it in the grinding, lest
the Putty should scratch it. Whether this way may not do well enough for
polishing these reflecting Glasses, I have not yet tried. But he that
shall try either this or any other way of polishing which he may think
better, may do well to make his Glasses ready for polishing, by grinding
them without that Violence, wherewith our _London_ Workmen press their
Glasses in grinding. For by such violent pressure, Glasses are apt to
bend a little in the grinding, and such bending will certainly spoil
their Figure. To recommend therefore the consideration of these
reflecting Glasses to such Artists as are curious in figuring Glasses, I
shall describe this optical Instrument in the following Proposition.


_PROP._ VIII. PROB. II.

_To shorten Telescopes._

Let ABCD [in _Fig._ 29.] represent a Glass spherically concave on the
foreside AB, and as much convex on the backside CD, so that it be every
where of an equal thickness. Let it not be thicker on one side than on
the other, lest it make Objects appear colour'd and indistinct, and let
it be very truly wrought and quick-silver'd over on the backside; and
set in the Tube VXYZ which must be very black within. Let EFG represent
a Prism of Glass or Crystal placed near the other end of the Tube, in
the middle of it, by means of a handle of Brass or Iron FGK, to the end
of which made flat it is cemented. Let this Prism be rectangular at E,
and let the other two Angles at F and G be accurately equal to each
other, and by consequence equal to half right ones, and let the plane
sides FE and GE be square, and by consequence the third side FG a
rectangular Parallelogram, whose length is to its breadth in a
subduplicate proportion of two to one. Let it be so placed in the Tube,
that the Axis of the Speculum may pass through the middle of the square
side EF perpendicularly and by consequence through the middle of the
side FG at an Angle of 45 Degrees, and let the side EF be turned towards
the Speculum, and the distance of this Prism from the Speculum be such
that the Rays of the Light PQ, RS, &c. which are incident upon the
Speculum in Lines parallel to the Axis thereof, may enter the Prism at
the side EF, and be reflected by the side FG, and thence go out of it
through the side GE, to the Point T, which must be the common Focus of
the Speculum ABDC, and of a Plano-convex Eye-glass H, through which
those Rays must pass to the Eye. And let the Rays at their coming out of
the Glass pass through a small round hole, or aperture made in a little
plate of Lead, Brass, or Silver, wherewith the Glass is to be covered,
which hole must be no bigger than is necessary for Light enough to pass
through. For so it will render the Object distinct, the Plate in which
'tis made intercepting all the erroneous part of the Light which comes
from the verges of the Speculum AB. Such an Instrument well made, if it
be six Foot long, (reckoning the length from the Speculum to the Prism,
and thence to the Focus T) will bear an aperture of six Inches at the
Speculum, and magnify between two and three hundred times. But the hole
H here limits the aperture with more advantage, than if the aperture was
placed at the Speculum. If the Instrument be made longer or shorter, the
aperture must be in proportion as the Cube of the square-square Root of
the length, and the magnifying as the aperture. But it's convenient that
the Speculum be an Inch or two broader than the aperture at the least,
and that the Glass of the Speculum be thick, that it bend not in the
working. The Prism EFG must be no bigger than is necessary, and its back
side FG must not be quick-silver'd over. For without quicksilver it will
reflect all the Light incident on it from the Speculum.

[Illustration: FIG. 29.]

In this Instrument the Object will be inverted, but may be erected by
making the square sides FF and EG of the Prism EFG not plane but
spherically convex, that the Rays may cross as well before they come at
it as afterwards between it and the Eye-glass. If it be desired that the
Instrument bear a larger aperture, that may be also done by composing
the Speculum of two Glasses with Water between them.

If the Theory of making Telescopes could at length be fully brought into
Practice, yet there would be certain Bounds beyond which Telescopes
could not perform. For the Air through which we look upon the Stars, is
in a perpetual Tremor; as may be seen by the tremulous Motion of Shadows
cast from high Towers, and by the twinkling of the fix'd Stars. But
these Stars do not twinkle when viewed through Telescopes which have
large apertures. For the Rays of Light which pass through divers parts
of the aperture, tremble each of them apart, and by means of their
various and sometimes contrary Tremors, fall at one and the same time
upon different points in the bottom of the Eye, and their trembling
Motions are too quick and confused to be perceived severally. And all
these illuminated Points constitute one broad lucid Point, composed of
those many trembling Points confusedly and insensibly mixed with one
another by very short and swift Tremors, and thereby cause the Star to
appear broader than it is, and without any trembling of the whole. Long
Telescopes may cause Objects to appear brighter and larger than short
ones can do, but they cannot be so formed as to take away that confusion
of the Rays which arises from the Tremors of the Atmosphere. The only
Remedy is a most serene and quiet Air, such as may perhaps be found on
the tops of the highest Mountains above the grosser Clouds.

FOOTNOTES:

[C] _See our_ Author's Lectiones Opticæ § 10. _Sect. II. § 29. and Sect.
III. Prop. 25._

[D] See our Author's _Lectiones Opticæ_, Part. I. Sect. 1. §5.

[E] _This is very fully treated of in our_ Author's Lect. Optic. _Part_
I. _Sect._ II.

[F] _See our_ Author's Lect. Optic. Part I. Sect. II. § 29.

[G] _This is demonstrated in our_ Author's Lect. Optic. _Part_ I.
_Sect._ IV. _Prop._ 37.

[H] _How to do this, is shewn in our_ Author's Lect. Optic. _Part_ I.
_Sect._ IV. _Prop._ 31.




THE FIRST BOOK OF OPTICKS




_PART II._


_PROP._ I. THEOR. I.

_The Phænomena of Colours in refracted or reflected Light are not caused
by new Modifications of the Light variously impress'd, according to the
various Terminations of the Light and Shadow_.

The PROOF by Experiments.

_Exper._ 1. For if the Sun shine into a very dark Chamber through an
oblong hole F, [in _Fig._ 1.] whose breadth is the sixth or eighth part
of an Inch, or something less; and his beam FH do afterwards pass first
through a very large Prism ABC, distant about 20 Feet from the hole, and
parallel to it, and then (with its white part) through an oblong hole H,
whose breadth is about the fortieth or sixtieth part of an Inch, and
which is made in a black opake Body GI, and placed at the distance of
two or three Feet from the Prism, in a parallel Situation both to the
Prism and to the former hole, and if this white Light thus transmitted
through the hole H, fall afterwards upon a white Paper _pt_, placed
after that hole H, at the distance of three or four Feet from it, and
there paint the usual Colours of the Prism, suppose red at _t_, yellow
at _s_, green at _r_, blue at _q_, and violet at _p_; you may with an
Iron Wire, or any such like slender opake Body, whose breadth is about
the tenth part of an Inch, by intercepting the Rays at _k_, _l_, _m_,
_n_ or _o_, take away any one of the Colours at _t_, _s_, _r_, _q_ or
_p_, whilst the other Colours remain upon the Paper as before; or with
an Obstacle something bigger you may take away any two, or three, or
four Colours together, the rest remaining: So that any one of the
Colours as well as violet may become outmost in the Confine of the
Shadow towards _p_, and any one of them as well as red may become
outmost in the Confine of the Shadow towards _t_, and any one of them
may also border upon the Shadow made within the Colours by the Obstacle
R intercepting some intermediate part of the Light; and, lastly, any one
of them by being left alone, may border upon the Shadow on either hand.
All the Colours have themselves indifferently to any Confines of Shadow,
and therefore the differences of these Colours from one another, do not
arise from the different Confines of Shadow, whereby Light is variously
modified, as has hitherto been the Opinion of Philosophers. In trying
these things 'tis to be observed, that by how much the holes F and H are
narrower, and the Intervals between them and the Prism greater, and the
Chamber darker, by so much the better doth the Experiment succeed;
provided the Light be not so far diminished, but that the Colours at
_pt_ be sufficiently visible. To procure a Prism of solid Glass large
enough for this Experiment will be difficult, and therefore a prismatick
Vessel must be made of polish'd Glass Plates cemented together, and
filled with salt Water or clear Oil.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

_Exper._ 2. The Sun's Light let into a dark Chamber through the round
hole F, [in _Fig._ 2.] half an Inch wide, passed first through the Prism
ABC placed at the hole, and then through a Lens PT something more than
four Inches broad, and about eight Feet distant from the Prism, and
thence converged to O the Focus of the Lens distant from it about three
Feet, and there fell upon a white Paper DE. If that Paper was
perpendicular to that Light incident upon it, as 'tis represented in the
posture DE, all the Colours upon it at O appeared white. But if the
Paper being turned about an Axis parallel to the Prism, became very much
inclined to the Light, as 'tis represented in the Positions _de_ and
_[Greek: de]_; the same Light in the one case appeared yellow and red,
in the other blue. Here one and the same part of the Light in one and
the same place, according to the various Inclinations of the Paper,
appeared in one case white, in another yellow or red, in a third blue,
whilst the Confine of Light and shadow, and the Refractions of the Prism
in all these cases remained the same.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

_Exper._ 3. Such another Experiment may be more easily tried as follows.
Let a broad beam of the Sun's Light coming into a dark Chamber through a
hole in the Window-shut be refracted by a large Prism ABC, [in _Fig._
3.] whose refracting Angle C is more than 60 Degrees, and so soon as it
comes out of the Prism, let it fall upon the white Paper DE glewed upon
a stiff Plane; and this Light, when the Paper is perpendicular to it, as
'tis represented in DE, will appear perfectly white upon the Paper; but
when the Paper is very much inclin'd to it in such a manner as to keep
always parallel to the Axis of the Prism, the whiteness of the whole
Light upon the Paper will according to the inclination of the Paper this
way or that way, change either into yellow and red, as in the posture
_de_, or into blue and violet, as in the posture [Greek: de]. And if the
Light before it fall upon the Paper be twice refracted the same way by
two parallel Prisms, these Colours will become the more conspicuous.
Here all the middle parts of the broad beam of white Light which fell
upon the Paper, did without any Confine of Shadow to modify it, become
colour'd all over with one uniform Colour, the Colour being always the
same in the middle of the Paper as at the edges, and this Colour changed
according to the various Obliquity of the reflecting Paper, without any
change in the Refractions or Shadow, or in the Light which fell upon the
Paper. And therefore these Colours are to be derived from some other
Cause than the new Modifications of Light by Refractions and Shadows.

If it be asked, what then is their Cause? I answer, That the Paper in
the posture _de_, being more oblique to the more refrangible Rays than
to the less refrangible ones, is more strongly illuminated by the latter
than by the former, and therefore the less refrangible Rays are
predominant in the reflected Light. And where-ever they are predominant
in any Light, they tinge it with red or yellow, as may in some measure
appear by the first Proposition of the first Part of this Book, and will
more fully appear hereafter. And the contrary happens in the posture of
the Paper [Greek: de], the more refrangible Rays being then predominant
which always tinge Light with blues and violets.

_Exper._ 4. The Colours of Bubbles with which Children play are various,
and change their Situation variously, without any respect to any Confine
or Shadow. If such a Bubble be cover'd with a concave Glass, to keep it
from being agitated by any Wind or Motion of the Air, the Colours will
slowly and regularly change their situation, even whilst the Eye and the
Bubble, and all Bodies which emit any Light, or cast any Shadow, remain
unmoved. And therefore their Colours arise from some regular Cause which
depends not on any Confine of Shadow. What this Cause is will be shewed
in the next Book.

To these Experiments may be added the tenth Experiment of the first Part
of this first Book, where the Sun's Light in a dark Room being
trajected through the parallel Superficies of two Prisms tied together
in the form of a Parallelopipede, became totally of one uniform yellow
or red Colour, at its emerging out of the Prisms. Here, in the
production of these Colours, the Confine of Shadow can have nothing to
do. For the Light changes from white to yellow, orange and red
successively, without any alteration of the Confine of Shadow: And at
both edges of the emerging Light where the contrary Confines of Shadow
ought to produce different Effects, the Colour is one and the same,
whether it be white, yellow, orange or red: And in the middle of the
emerging Light, where there is no Confine of Shadow at all, the Colour
is the very same as at the edges, the whole Light at its very first
Emergence being of one uniform Colour, whether white, yellow, orange or
red, and going on thence perpetually without any change of Colour, such
as the Confine of Shadow is vulgarly supposed to work in refracted Light
after its Emergence. Neither can these Colours arise from any new
Modifications of the Light by Refractions, because they change
successively from white to yellow, orange and red, while the Refractions
remain the same, and also because the Refractions are made contrary ways
by parallel Superficies which destroy one another's Effects. They arise
not therefore from any Modifications of Light made by Refractions and
Shadows, but have some other Cause. What that Cause is we shewed above
in this tenth Experiment, and need not here repeat it.

There is yet another material Circumstance of this Experiment. For this
emerging Light being by a third Prism HIK [in _Fig._ 22. _Part_ I.][I]
refracted towards the Paper PT, and there painting the usual Colours of
the Prism, red, yellow, green, blue, violet: If these Colours arose from
the Refractions of that Prism modifying the Light, they would not be in
the Light before its Incidence on that Prism. And yet in that Experiment
we found, that when by turning the two first Prisms about their common
Axis all the Colours were made to vanish but the red; the Light which
makes that red being left alone, appeared of the very same red Colour
before its Incidence on the third Prism. And in general we find by other
Experiments, that when the Rays which differ in Refrangibility are
separated from one another, and any one Sort of them is considered
apart, the Colour of the Light which they compose cannot be changed by
any Refraction or Reflexion whatever, as it ought to be were Colours
nothing else than Modifications of Light caused by Refractions, and
Reflexions, and Shadows. This Unchangeableness of Colour I am now to
describe in the following Proposition.


_PROP._ II. THEOR. II.

_All homogeneal Light has its proper Colour answering to its Degree of
Refrangibility, and that Colour cannot be changed by Reflexions and
Refractions._

In the Experiments of the fourth Proposition of the first Part of this
first Book, when I had separated the heterogeneous Rays from one
another, the Spectrum _pt_ formed by the separated Rays, did in the
Progress from its End _p_, on which the most refrangible Rays fell, unto
its other End _t_, on which the least refrangible Rays fell, appear
tinged with this Series of Colours, violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow,
orange, red, together with all their intermediate Degrees in a continual
Succession perpetually varying. So that there appeared as many Degrees
of Colours, as there were sorts of Rays differing in Refrangibility.

_Exper._ 5. Now, that these Colours could not be changed by Refraction,
I knew by refracting with a Prism sometimes one very little Part of this
Light, sometimes another very little Part, as is described in the
twelfth Experiment of the first Part of this Book. For by this
Refraction the Colour of the Light was never changed in the least. If
any Part of the red Light was refracted, it remained totally of the same
red Colour as before. No orange, no yellow, no green or blue, no other
new Colour was produced by that Refraction. Neither did the Colour any
ways change by repeated Refractions, but continued always the same red
entirely as at first. The like Constancy and Immutability I found also
in the blue, green, and other Colours. So also, if I looked through a
Prism upon any Body illuminated with any part of this homogeneal Light,
as in the fourteenth Experiment of the first Part of this Book is
described; I could not perceive any new Colour generated this way. All
Bodies illuminated with compound Light appear through Prisms confused,
(as was said above) and tinged with various new Colours, but those
illuminated with homogeneal Light appeared through Prisms neither less
distinct, nor otherwise colour'd, than when viewed with the naked Eyes.
Their Colours were not in the least changed by the Refraction of the
interposed Prism. I speak here of a sensible Change of Colour: For the
Light which I here call homogeneal, being not absolutely homogeneal,
there ought to arise some little Change of Colour from its
Heterogeneity. But, if that Heterogeneity was so little as it might be
made by the said Experiments of the fourth Proposition, that Change was
not sensible, and therefore in Experiments, where Sense is Judge, ought
to be accounted none at all.

_Exper._ 6. And as these Colours were not changeable by Refractions, so
neither were they by Reflexions. For all white, grey, red, yellow,
green, blue, violet Bodies, as Paper, Ashes, red Lead, Orpiment, Indico
Bise, Gold, Silver, Copper, Grass, blue Flowers, Violets, Bubbles of
Water tinged with various Colours, Peacock's Feathers, the Tincture of
_Lignum Nephriticum_, and such-like, in red homogeneal Light appeared
totally red, in blue Light totally blue, in green Light totally green,
and so of other Colours. In the homogeneal Light of any Colour they all
appeared totally of that same Colour, with this only Difference, that
some of them reflected that Light more strongly, others more faintly. I
never yet found any Body, which by reflecting homogeneal Light could
sensibly change its Colour.

From all which it is manifest, that if the Sun's Light consisted of but
one sort of Rays, there would be but one Colour in the whole World, nor
would it be possible to produce any new Colour by Reflexions and
Refractions, and by consequence that the variety of Colours depends upon
the Composition of Light.


_DEFINITION._

The homogeneal Light and Rays which appear red, or rather make Objects
appear so, I call Rubrifick or Red-making; those which make Objects
appear yellow, green, blue, and violet, I call Yellow-making,
Green-making, Blue-making, Violet-making, and so of the rest. And if at
any time I speak of Light and Rays as coloured or endued with Colours, I
would be understood to speak not philosophically and properly, but
grossly, and accordingly to such Conceptions as vulgar People in seeing
all these Experiments would be apt to frame. For the Rays to speak
properly are not coloured. In them there is nothing else than a certain
Power and Disposition to stir up a Sensation of this or that Colour.
For as Sound in a Bell or musical String, or other sounding Body, is
nothing but a trembling Motion, and in the Air nothing but that Motion
propagated from the Object, and in the Sensorium 'tis a Sense of that
Motion under the Form of Sound; so Colours in the Object are nothing but
a Disposition to reflect this or that sort of Rays more copiously than
the rest; in the Rays they are nothing but their Dispositions to
propagate this or that Motion into the Sensorium, and in the Sensorium
they are Sensations of those Motions under the Forms of Colours.


_PROP._ III. PROB. I.

_To define the Refrangibility of the several sorts of homogeneal Light
answering to the several Colours._

For determining this Problem I made the following Experiment.[J]

_Exper._ 7. When I had caused the Rectilinear Sides AF, GM, [in _Fig._
4.] of the Spectrum of Colours made by the Prism to be distinctly
defined, as in the fifth Experiment of the first Part of this Book is
described, there were found in it all the homogeneal Colours in the same
Order and Situation one among another as in the Spectrum of simple
Light, described in the fourth Proposition of that Part. For the Circles
of which the Spectrum of compound Light PT is composed, and which in
the middle Parts of the Spectrum interfere, and are intermix'd with one
another, are not intermix'd in their outmost Parts where they touch
those Rectilinear Sides AF and GM. And therefore, in those Rectilinear
Sides when distinctly defined, there is no new Colour generated by
Refraction. I observed also, that if any where between the two outmost
Circles TMF and PGA a Right Line, as [Greek: gd], was cross to the
Spectrum, so as both Ends to fall perpendicularly upon its Rectilinear
Sides, there appeared one and the same Colour, and degree of Colour from
one End of this Line to the other. I delineated therefore in a Paper the
Perimeter of the Spectrum FAP GMT, and in trying the third Experiment of
the first Part of this Book, I held the Paper so that the Spectrum might
fall upon this delineated Figure, and agree with it exactly, whilst an
Assistant, whose Eyes for distinguishing Colours were more critical than
mine, did by Right Lines [Greek: ab, gd, ez,] &c. drawn cross the
Spectrum, note the Confines of the Colours, that is of the red M[Greek:
ab]F, of the orange [Greek: agdb], of the yellow [Greek: gezd], of the
green [Greek: eêthz], of the blue [Greek: êikth], of the indico [Greek:
ilmk], and of the violet [Greek: l]GA[Greek: m]. And this Operation
being divers times repeated both in the same, and in several Papers, I
found that the Observations agreed well enough with one another, and
that the Rectilinear Sides MG and FA were by the said cross Lines
divided after the manner of a Musical Chord. Let GM be produced to X,
that MX may be equal to GM, and conceive GX, [Greek: l]X, [Greek: i]X,
[Greek: ê]X, [Greek: e]X, [Greek: g]X, [Greek: a]X, MX, to be in
proportion to one another, as the Numbers, 1, 8/9, 5/6, 3/4, 2/3, 3/5,
9/16, 1/2, and so to represent the Chords of the Key, and of a Tone, a
third Minor, a fourth, a fifth, a sixth Major, a seventh and an eighth
above that Key: And the Intervals M[Greek: a], [Greek: ag], [Greek: ge],
[Greek: eê], [Greek: êi], [Greek: il], and [Greek: l]G, will be the
Spaces which the several Colours (red, orange, yellow, green, blue,
indigo, violet) take up.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

Now these Intervals or Spaces subtending the Differences of the
Refractions of the Rays going to the Limits of those Colours, that is,
to the Points M, [Greek: a], [Greek: g], [Greek: e], [Greek: ê], [Greek:
i], [Greek: l], G, may without any sensible Error be accounted
proportional to the Differences of the Sines of Refraction of those Rays
having one common Sine of Incidence, and therefore since the common Sine
of Incidence of the most and least refrangible Rays out of Glass into
Air was (by a Method described above) found in proportion to their Sines
of Refraction, as 50 to 77 and 78, divide the Difference between the
Sines of Refraction 77 and 78, as the Line GM is divided by those
Intervals, and you will have 77, 77-1/8, 77-1/5, 77-1/3, 77-1/2, 77-2/3,
77-7/9, 78, the Sines of Refraction of those Rays out of Glass into Air,
their common Sine of Incidence being 50. So then the Sines of the
Incidences of all the red-making Rays out of Glass into Air, were to the
Sines of their Refractions, not greater than 50 to 77, nor less than 50
to 77-1/8, but they varied from one another according to all
intermediate Proportions. And the Sines of the Incidences of the
green-making Rays were to the Sines of their Refractions in all
Proportions from that of 50 to 77-1/3, unto that of 50 to 77-1/2. And
by the like Limits above-mentioned were the Refractions of the Rays
belonging to the rest of the Colours defined, the Sines of the
red-making Rays extending from 77 to 77-1/8, those of the orange-making
from 77-1/8 to 77-1/5, those of the yellow-making from 77-1/5 to 77-1/3,
those of the green-making from 77-1/3 to 77-1/2, those of the
blue-making from 77-1/2 to 77-2/3, those of the indigo-making from
77-2/3 to 77-7/9, and those of the violet from 77-7/9, to 78.

These are the Laws of the Refractions made out of Glass into Air, and
thence by the third Axiom of the first Part of this Book, the Laws of
the Refractions made out of Air into Glass are easily derived.

_Exper._ 8. I found moreover, that when Light goes out of Air through
several contiguous refracting Mediums as through Water and Glass, and
thence goes out again into Air, whether the refracting Superficies be
parallel or inclin'd to one another, that Light as often as by contrary
Refractions 'tis so corrected, that it emergeth in Lines parallel to
those in which it was incident, continues ever after to be white. But if
the emergent Rays be inclined to the incident, the Whiteness of the
emerging Light will by degrees in passing on from the Place of
Emergence, become tinged in its Edges with Colours. This I try'd by
refracting Light with Prisms of Glass placed within a Prismatick Vessel
of Water. Now those Colours argue a diverging and separation of the
heterogeneous Rays from one another by means of their unequal
Refractions, as in what follows will more fully appear. And, on the
contrary, the permanent whiteness argues, that in like Incidences of the
Rays there is no such separation of the emerging Rays, and by
consequence no inequality of their whole Refractions. Whence I seem to
gather the two following Theorems.

1. The Excesses of the Sines of Refraction of several sorts of Rays
above their common Sine of Incidence when the Refractions are made out
of divers denser Mediums immediately into one and the same rarer Medium,
suppose of Air, are to one another in a given Proportion.

2. The Proportion of the Sine of Incidence to the Sine of Refraction of
one and the same sort of Rays out of one Medium into another, is
composed of the Proportion of the Sine of Incidence to the Sine of
Refraction out of the first Medium into any third Medium, and of the
Proportion of the Sine of Incidence to the Sine of Refraction out of
that third Medium into the second Medium.

By the first Theorem the Refractions of the Rays of every sort made out
of any Medium into Air are known by having the Refraction of the Rays of
any one sort. As for instance, if the Refractions of the Rays of every
sort out of Rain-water into Air be desired, let the common Sine of
Incidence out of Glass into Air be subducted from the Sines of
Refraction, and the Excesses will be 27, 27-1/8, 27-1/5, 27-1/3, 27-1/2,
27-2/3, 27-7/9, 28. Suppose now that the Sine of Incidence of the least
refrangible Rays be to their Sine of Refraction out of Rain-water into
Air as 3 to 4, and say as 1 the difference of those Sines is to 3 the
Sine of Incidence, so is 27 the least of the Excesses above-mentioned to
a fourth Number 81; and 81 will be the common Sine of Incidence out of
Rain-water into Air, to which Sine if you add all the above-mentioned
Excesses, you will have the desired Sines of the Refractions 108,
108-1/8, 108-1/5, 108-1/3, 108-1/2, 108-2/3, 108-7/9, 109.

By the latter Theorem the Refraction out of one Medium into another is
gathered as often as you have the Refractions out of them both into any
third Medium. As if the Sine of Incidence of any Ray out of Glass into
Air be to its Sine of Refraction, as 20 to 31, and the Sine of Incidence
of the same Ray out of Air into Water, be to its Sine of Refraction as 4
to 3; the Sine of Incidence of that Ray out of Glass into Water will be
to its Sine of Refraction as 20 to 31 and 4 to 3 jointly, that is, as
the Factum of 20 and 4 to the Factum of 31 and 3, or as 80 to 93.

And these Theorems being admitted into Opticks, there would be scope
enough of handling that Science voluminously after a new manner,[K] not
only by teaching those things which tend to the perfection of Vision,
but also by determining mathematically all kinds of Phænomena of Colours
which could be produced by Refractions. For to do this, there is nothing
else requisite than to find out the Separations of heterogeneous Rays,
and their various Mixtures and Proportions in every Mixture. By this
way of arguing I invented almost all the Phænomena described in these
Books, beside some others less necessary to the Argument; and by the
successes I met with in the Trials, I dare promise, that to him who
shall argue truly, and then try all things with good Glasses and
sufficient Circumspection, the expected Event will not be wanting. But
he is first to know what Colours will arise from any others mix'd in any
assigned Proportion.


_PROP._ IV. THEOR. III.

_Colours may be produced by Composition which shall be like to the
Colours of homogeneal Light as to the Appearance of Colour, but not as
to the Immutability of Colour and Constitution of Light. And those
Colours by how much they are more compounded by so much are they less
full and intense, and by too much Composition they maybe diluted and
weaken'd till they cease, and the Mixture becomes white or grey. There
may be also Colours produced by Composition, which are not fully like
any of the Colours of homogeneal Light._

For a Mixture of homogeneal red and yellow compounds an Orange, like in
appearance of Colour to that orange which in the series of unmixed
prismatick Colours lies between them; but the Light of one orange is
homogeneal as to Refrangibility, and that of the other is heterogeneal,
and the Colour of the one, if viewed through a Prism, remains unchanged,
that of the other is changed and resolved into its component Colours red
and yellow. And after the same manner other neighbouring homogeneal
Colours may compound new Colours, like the intermediate homogeneal ones,
as yellow and green, the Colour between them both, and afterwards, if
blue be added, there will be made a green the middle Colour of the three
which enter the Composition. For the yellow and blue on either hand, if
they are equal in quantity they draw the intermediate green equally
towards themselves in Composition, and so keep it as it were in
Æquilibrion, that it verge not more to the yellow on the one hand, and
to the blue on the other, but by their mix'd Actions remain still a
middle Colour. To this mix'd green there may be farther added some red
and violet, and yet the green will not presently cease, but only grow
less full and vivid, and by increasing the red and violet, it will grow
more and more dilute, until by the prevalence of the added Colours it be
overcome and turned into whiteness, or some other Colour. So if to the
Colour of any homogeneal Light, the Sun's white Light composed of all
sorts of Rays be added, that Colour will not vanish or change its
Species, but be diluted, and by adding more and more white it will be
diluted more and more perpetually. Lastly, If red and violet be mingled,
there will be generated according to their various Proportions various
Purples, such as are not like in appearance to the Colour of any
homogeneal Light, and of these Purples mix'd with yellow and blue may be
made other new Colours.


_PROP._ V. THEOR. IV.

_Whiteness and all grey Colours between white and black, may be
compounded of Colours, and the whiteness of the Sun's Light is
compounded of all the primary Colours mix'd in a due Proportion._

The PROOF by Experiments.

_Exper._ 9. The Sun shining into a dark Chamber through a little round
hole in the Window-shut, and his Light being there refracted by a Prism
to cast his coloured Image PT [in _Fig._ 5.] upon the opposite Wall: I
held a white Paper V to that image in such manner that it might be
illuminated by the colour'd Light reflected from thence, and yet not
intercept any part of that Light in its passage from the Prism to the
Spectrum. And I found that when the Paper was held nearer to any Colour
than to the rest, it appeared of that Colour to which it approached
nearest; but when it was equally or almost equally distant from all the
Colours, so that it might be equally illuminated by them all it appeared
white. And in this last situation of the Paper, if some Colours were
intercepted, the Paper lost its white Colour, and appeared of the Colour
of the rest of the Light which was not intercepted. So then the Paper
was illuminated with Lights of various Colours, namely, red, yellow,
green, blue and violet, and every part of the Light retained its proper
Colour, until it was incident on the Paper, and became reflected thence
to the Eye; so that if it had been either alone (the rest of the Light
being intercepted) or if it had abounded most, and been predominant in
the Light reflected from the Paper, it would have tinged the Paper with
its own Colour; and yet being mixed with the rest of the Colours in a
due proportion, it made the Paper look white, and therefore by a
Composition with the rest produced that Colour. The several parts of the
coloured Light reflected from the Spectrum, whilst they are propagated
from thence through the Air, do perpetually retain their proper Colours,
because wherever they fall upon the Eyes of any Spectator, they make the
several parts of the Spectrum to appear under their proper Colours. They
retain therefore their proper Colours when they fall upon the Paper V,
and so by the confusion and perfect mixture of those Colours compound
the whiteness of the Light reflected from thence.

_Exper._ 10. Let that Spectrum or solar Image PT [in _Fig._ 6.] fall now
upon the Lens MN above four Inches broad, and about six Feet distant
from the Prism ABC and so figured that it may cause the coloured Light
which divergeth from the Prism to converge and meet again at its Focus
G, about six or eight Feet distant from the Lens, and there to fall
perpendicularly upon a white Paper DE. And if you move this Paper to and
fro, you will perceive that near the Lens, as at _de_, the whole solar
Image (suppose at _pt_) will appear upon it intensely coloured after the
manner above-explained, and that by receding from the Lens those Colours
will perpetually come towards one another, and by mixing more and more
dilute one another continually, until at length the Paper come to the
Focus G, where by a perfect mixture they will wholly vanish and be
converted into whiteness, the whole Light appearing now upon the Paper
like a little white Circle. And afterwards by receding farther from the
Lens, the Rays which before converged will now cross one another in the
Focus G, and diverge from thence, and thereby make the Colours to appear
again, but yet in a contrary order; suppose at [Greek: de], where the
red _t_ is now above which before was below, and the violet _p_ is below
which before was above.

Let us now stop the Paper at the Focus G, where the Light appears
totally white and circular, and let us consider its whiteness. I say,
that this is composed of the converging Colours. For if any of those
Colours be intercepted at the Lens, the whiteness will cease and
degenerate into that Colour which ariseth from the composition of the
other Colours which are not intercepted. And then if the intercepted
Colours be let pass and fall upon that compound Colour, they mix with
it, and by their mixture restore the whiteness. So if the violet, blue
and green be intercepted, the remaining yellow, orange and red will
compound upon the Paper an orange, and then if the intercepted Colours
be let pass, they will fall upon this compounded orange, and together
with it decompound a white. So also if the red and violet be
intercepted, the remaining yellow, green and blue, will compound a green
upon the Paper, and then the red and violet being let pass will fall
upon this green, and together with it decompound a white. And that in
this Composition of white the several Rays do not suffer any Change in
their colorific Qualities by acting upon one another, but are only
mixed, and by a mixture of their Colours produce white, may farther
appear by these Arguments.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

If the Paper be placed beyond the Focus G, suppose at [Greek: de], and
then the red Colour at the Lens be alternately intercepted, and let pass
again, the violet Colour on the Paper will not suffer any Change
thereby, as it ought to do if the several sorts of Rays acted upon one
another in the Focus G, where they cross. Neither will the red upon the
Paper be changed by any alternate stopping, and letting pass the violet
which crosseth it.

And if the Paper be placed at the Focus G, and the white round Image at
G be viewed through the Prism HIK, and by the Refraction of that Prism
be translated to the place _rv_, and there appear tinged with various
Colours, namely, the violet at _v_ and red at _r_, and others between,
and then the red Colours at the Lens be often stopp'd and let pass by
turns, the red at _r_ will accordingly disappear, and return as often,
but the violet at _v_ will not thereby suffer any Change. And so by
stopping and letting pass alternately the blue at the Lens, the blue at
_v_ will accordingly disappear and return, without any Change made in
the red at _r_. The red therefore depends on one sort of Rays, and the
blue on another sort, which in the Focus G where they are commix'd, do
not act on one another. And there is the same Reason of the other
Colours.

I considered farther, that when the most refrangible Rays P_p_, and the
least refrangible ones T_t_, are by converging inclined to one another,
the Paper, if held very oblique to those Rays in the Focus G, might
reflect one sort of them more copiously than the other sort, and by that
Means the reflected Light would be tinged in that Focus with the Colour
of the predominant Rays, provided those Rays severally retained their
Colours, or colorific Qualities in the Composition of White made by them
in that Focus. But if they did not retain them in that White, but became
all of them severally endued there with a Disposition to strike the
Sense with the Perception of White, then they could never lose their
Whiteness by such Reflexions. I inclined therefore the Paper to the Rays
very obliquely, as in the second Experiment of this second Part of the
first Book, that the most refrangible Rays, might be more copiously
reflected than the rest, and the Whiteness at Length changed
successively into blue, indigo, and violet. Then I inclined it the
contrary Way, that the least refrangible Rays might be more copious in
the reflected Light than the rest, and the Whiteness turned successively
to yellow, orange, and red.

Lastly, I made an Instrument XY in fashion of a Comb, whose Teeth being
in number sixteen, were about an Inch and a half broad, and the
Intervals of the Teeth about two Inches wide. Then by interposing
successively the Teeth of this Instrument near the Lens, I intercepted
Part of the Colours by the interposed Tooth, whilst the rest of them
went on through the Interval of the Teeth to the Paper DE, and there
painted a round Solar Image. But the Paper I had first placed so, that
the Image might appear white as often as the Comb was taken away; and
then the Comb being as was said interposed, that Whiteness by reason of
the intercepted Part of the Colours at the Lens did always change into
the Colour compounded of those Colours which were not intercepted, and
that Colour was by the Motion of the Comb perpetually varied so, that in
the passing of every Tooth over the Lens all these Colours, red, yellow,
green, blue, and purple, did always succeed one another. I caused
therefore all the Teeth to pass successively over the Lens, and when the
Motion was slow, there appeared a perpetual Succession of the Colours
upon the Paper: But if I so much accelerated the Motion, that the
Colours by reason of their quick Succession could not be distinguished
from one another, the Appearance of the single Colours ceased. There was
no red, no yellow, no green, no blue, nor purple to be seen any longer,
but from a Confusion of them all there arose one uniform white Colour.
Of the Light which now by the Mixture of all the Colours appeared white,
there was no Part really white. One Part was red, another yellow, a
third green, a fourth blue, a fifth purple, and every Part retains its
proper Colour till it strike the Sensorium. If the Impressions follow
one another slowly, so that they may be severally perceived, there is
made a distinct Sensation of all the Colours one after another in a
continual Succession. But if the Impressions follow one another so
quickly, that they cannot be severally perceived, there ariseth out of
them all one common Sensation, which is neither of this Colour alone nor
of that alone, but hath it self indifferently to 'em all, and this is a
Sensation of Whiteness. By the Quickness of the Successions, the
Impressions of the several Colours are confounded in the Sensorium, and
out of that Confusion ariseth a mix'd Sensation. If a burning Coal be
nimbly moved round in a Circle with Gyrations continually repeated, the
whole Circle will appear like Fire; the reason of which is, that the
Sensation of the Coal in the several Places of that Circle remains
impress'd on the Sensorium, until the Coal return again to the same
Place. And so in a quick Consecution of the Colours the Impression of
every Colour remains in the Sensorium, until a Revolution of all the
Colours be compleated, and that first Colour return again. The
Impressions therefore of all the successive Colours are at once in the
Sensorium, and jointly stir up a Sensation of them all; and so it is
manifest by this Experiment, that the commix'd Impressions of all the
Colours do stir up and beget a Sensation of white, that is, that
Whiteness is compounded of all the Colours.

And if the Comb be now taken away, that all the Colours may at once pass
from the Lens to the Paper, and be there intermixed, and together
reflected thence to the Spectator's Eyes; their Impressions on the
Sensorium being now more subtilly and perfectly commixed there, ought
much more to stir up a Sensation of Whiteness.

You may instead of the Lens use two Prisms HIK and LMN, which by
refracting the coloured Light the contrary Way to that of the first
Refraction, may make the diverging Rays converge and meet again in G, as
you see represented in the seventh Figure. For where they meet and mix,
they will compose a white Light, as when a Lens is used.

_Exper._ 11. Let the Sun's coloured Image PT [in _Fig._ 8.] fall upon
the Wall of a dark Chamber, as in the third Experiment of the first
Book, and let the same be viewed through a Prism _abc_, held parallel to
the Prism ABC, by whose Refraction that Image was made, and let it now
appear lower than before, suppose in the Place S over-against the red
Colour T. And if you go near to the Image PT, the Spectrum S will appear
oblong and coloured like the Image PT; but if you recede from it, the
Colours of the spectrum S will be contracted more and more, and at
length vanish, that Spectrum S becoming perfectly round and white; and
if you recede yet farther, the Colours will emerge again, but in a
contrary Order. Now that Spectrum S appears white in that Case, when the
Rays of several sorts which converge from the several Parts of the Image
PT, to the Prism _abc_, are so refracted unequally by it, that in their
Passage from the Prism to the Eye they may diverge from one and the same
Point of the Spectrum S, and so fall afterwards upon one and the same
Point in the bottom of the Eye, and there be mingled.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

And farther, if the Comb be here made use of, by whose Teeth the Colours
at the Image PT may be successively intercepted; the Spectrum S, when
the Comb is moved slowly, will be perpetually tinged with successive
Colours: But when by accelerating the Motion of the Comb, the Succession
of the Colours is so quick that they cannot be severally seen, that
Spectrum S, by a confused and mix'd Sensation of them all, will appear
white.

_Exper._ 12. The Sun shining through a large Prism ABC [in _Fig._ 9.]
upon a Comb XY, placed immediately behind the Prism, his Light which
passed through the Interstices of the Teeth fell upon a white Paper DE.
The Breadths of the Teeth were equal to their Interstices, and seven
Teeth together with their Interstices took up an Inch in Breadth. Now,
when the Paper was about two or three Inches distant from the Comb, the
Light which passed through its several Interstices painted so many
Ranges of Colours, _kl_, _mn_, _op_, _qr_, &c. which were parallel to
one another, and contiguous, and without any Mixture of white. And these
Ranges of Colours, if the Comb was moved continually up and down with a
reciprocal Motion, ascended and descended in the Paper, and when the
Motion of the Comb was so quick, that the Colours could not be
distinguished from one another, the whole Paper by their Confusion and
Mixture in the Sensorium appeared white.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.]

Let the Comb now rest, and let the Paper be removed farther from the
Prism, and the several Ranges of Colours will be dilated and expanded
into one another more and more, and by mixing their Colours will dilute
one another, and at length, when the distance of the Paper from the Comb
is about a Foot, or a little more (suppose in the Place 2D 2E) they will
so far dilute one another, as to become white.

With any Obstacle, let all the Light be now stopp'd which passes through
any one Interval of the Teeth, so that the Range of Colours which comes
from thence may be taken away, and you will see the Light of the rest of
the Ranges to be expanded into the Place of the Range taken away, and
there to be coloured. Let the intercepted Range pass on as before, and
its Colours falling upon the Colours of the other Ranges, and mixing
with them, will restore the Whiteness.

Let the Paper 2D 2E be now very much inclined to the Rays, so that the
most refrangible Rays may be more copiously reflected than the rest, and
the white Colour of the Paper through the Excess of those Rays will be
changed into blue and violet. Let the Paper be as much inclined the
contrary way, that the least refrangible Rays may be now more copiously
reflected than the rest, and by their Excess the Whiteness will be
changed into yellow and red. The several Rays therefore in that white
Light do retain their colorific Qualities, by which those of any sort,
whenever they become more copious than the rest, do by their Excess and
Predominance cause their proper Colour to appear.

And by the same way of arguing, applied to the third Experiment of this
second Part of the first Book, it may be concluded, that the white
Colour of all refracted Light at its very first Emergence, where it
appears as white as before its Incidence, is compounded of various
Colours.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.]

_Exper._ 13. In the foregoing Experiment the several Intervals of the
Teeth of the Comb do the Office of so many Prisms, every Interval
producing the Phænomenon of one Prism. Whence instead of those Intervals
using several Prisms, I try'd to compound Whiteness by mixing their
Colours, and did it by using only three Prisms, as also by using only
two as follows. Let two Prisms ABC and _abc_, [in _Fig._ 10.] whose
refracting Angles B and _b_ are equal, be so placed parallel to one
another, that the refracting Angle B of the one may touch the Angle _c_
at the Base of the other, and their Planes CB and _cb_, at which the
Rays emerge, may lie in Directum. Then let the Light trajected through
them fall upon the Paper MN, distant about 8 or 12 Inches from the
Prisms. And the Colours generated by the interior Limits B and _c_ of
the two Prisms, will be mingled at PT, and there compound white. For if
either Prism be taken away, the Colours made by the other will appear in
that Place PT, and when the Prism is restored to its Place again, so
that its Colours may there fall upon the Colours of the other, the
Mixture of them both will restore the Whiteness.

This Experiment succeeds also, as I have tried, when the Angle _b_ of
the lower Prism, is a little greater than the Angle B of the upper, and
between the interior Angles B and _c_, there intercedes some Space B_c_,
as is represented in the Figure, and the refracting Planes BC and _bc_,
are neither in Directum, nor parallel to one another. For there is
nothing more requisite to the Success of this Experiment, than that the
Rays of all sorts may be uniformly mixed upon the Paper in the Place PT.
If the most refrangible Rays coming from the superior Prism take up all
the Space from M to P, the Rays of the same sort which come from the
inferior Prism ought to begin at P, and take up all the rest of the
Space from thence towards N. If the least refrangible Rays coming from
the superior Prism take up the Space MT, the Rays of the same kind which
come from the other Prism ought to begin at T, and take up the
remaining Space TN. If one sort of the Rays which have intermediate
Degrees of Refrangibility, and come from the superior Prism be extended
through the Space MQ, and another sort of those Rays through the Space
MR, and a third sort of them through the Space MS, the same sorts of
Rays coming from the lower Prism, ought to illuminate the remaining
Spaces QN, RN, SN, respectively. And the same is to be understood of all
the other sorts of Rays. For thus the Rays of every sort will be
scattered uniformly and evenly through the whole Space MN, and so being
every where mix'd in the same Proportion, they must every where produce
the same Colour. And therefore, since by this Mixture they produce white
in the Exterior Spaces MP and TN, they must also produce white in the
Interior Space PT. This is the reason of the Composition by which
Whiteness was produced in this Experiment, and by what other way soever
I made the like Composition, the Result was Whiteness.

Lastly, If with the Teeth of a Comb of a due Size, the coloured Lights
of the two Prisms which fall upon the Space PT be alternately
intercepted, that Space PT, when the Motion of the Comb is slow, will
always appear coloured, but by accelerating the Motion of the Comb so
much that the successive Colours cannot be distinguished from one
another, it will appear white.

_Exper._ 14. Hitherto I have produced Whiteness by mixing the Colours of
Prisms. If now the Colours of natural Bodies are to be mingled, let
Water a little thicken'd with Soap be agitated to raise a Froth, and
after that Froth has stood a little, there will appear to one that shall
view it intently various Colours every where in the Surfaces of the
several Bubbles; but to one that shall go so far off, that he cannot
distinguish the Colours from one another, the whole Froth will grow
white with a perfect Whiteness.

_Exper._ 15. Lastly, In attempting to compound a white, by mixing the
coloured Powders which Painters use, I consider'd that all colour'd
Powders do suppress and stop in them a very considerable Part of the
Light by which they are illuminated. For they become colour'd by
reflecting the Light of their own Colours more copiously, and that of
all other Colours more sparingly, and yet they do not reflect the Light
of their own Colours so copiously as white Bodies do. If red Lead, for
instance, and a white Paper, be placed in the red Light of the colour'd
Spectrum made in a dark Chamber by the Refraction of a Prism, as is
described in the third Experiment of the first Part of this Book; the
Paper will appear more lucid than the red Lead, and therefore reflects
the red-making Rays more copiously than red Lead doth. And if they be
held in the Light of any other Colour, the Light reflected by the Paper
will exceed the Light reflected by the red Lead in a much greater
Proportion. And the like happens in Powders of other Colours. And
therefore by mixing such Powders, we are not to expect a strong and
full White, such as is that of Paper, but some dusky obscure one, such
as might arise from a Mixture of Light and Darkness, or from white and
black, that is, a grey, or dun, or russet brown, such as are the Colours
of a Man's Nail, of a Mouse, of Ashes, of ordinary Stones, of Mortar, of
Dust and Dirt in High-ways, and the like. And such a dark white I have
often produced by mixing colour'd Powders. For thus one Part of red
Lead, and five Parts of _Viride Æris_, composed a dun Colour like that
of a Mouse. For these two Colours were severally so compounded of
others, that in both together were a Mixture of all Colours; and there
was less red Lead used than _Viride Æris_, because of the Fulness of its
Colour. Again, one Part of red Lead, and four Parts of blue Bise,
composed a dun Colour verging a little to purple, and by adding to this
a certain Mixture of Orpiment and _Viride Æris_ in a due Proportion, the
Mixture lost its purple Tincture, and became perfectly dun. But the
Experiment succeeded best without Minium thus. To Orpiment I added by
little and little a certain full bright purple, which Painters use,
until the Orpiment ceased to be yellow, and became of a pale red. Then I
diluted that red by adding a little _Viride Æris_, and a little more
blue Bise than _Viride Æris_, until it became of such a grey or pale
white, as verged to no one of the Colours more than to another. For thus
it became of a Colour equal in Whiteness to that of Ashes, or of Wood
newly cut, or of a Man's Skin. The Orpiment reflected more Light than
did any other of the Powders, and therefore conduced more to the
Whiteness of the compounded Colour than they. To assign the Proportions
accurately may be difficult, by reason of the different Goodness of
Powders of the same kind. Accordingly, as the Colour of any Powder is
more or less full and luminous, it ought to be used in a less or greater
Proportion.

Now, considering that these grey and dun Colours may be also produced by
mixing Whites and Blacks, and by consequence differ from perfect Whites,
not in Species of Colours, but only in degree of Luminousness, it is
manifest that there is nothing more requisite to make them perfectly
white than to increase their Light sufficiently; and, on the contrary,
if by increasing their Light they can be brought to perfect Whiteness,
it will thence also follow, that they are of the same Species of Colour
with the best Whites, and differ from them only in the Quantity of
Light. And this I tried as follows. I took the third of the
above-mention'd grey Mixtures, (that which was compounded of Orpiment,
Purple, Bise, and _Viride Æris_) and rubbed it thickly upon the Floor of
my Chamber, where the Sun shone upon it through the opened Casement; and
by it, in the shadow, I laid a Piece of white Paper of the same Bigness.
Then going from them to the distance of 12 or 18 Feet, so that I could
not discern the Unevenness of the Surface of the Powder, nor the little
Shadows let fall from the gritty Particles thereof; the Powder appeared
intensely white, so as to transcend even the Paper it self in Whiteness,
especially if the Paper were a little shaded from the Light of the
Clouds, and then the Paper compared with the Powder appeared of such a
grey Colour as the Powder had done before. But by laying the Paper where
the Sun shines through the Glass of the Window, or by shutting the
Window that the Sun might shine through the Glass upon the Powder, and
by such other fit Means of increasing or decreasing the Lights wherewith
the Powder and Paper were illuminated, the Light wherewith the Powder is
illuminated may be made stronger in such a due Proportion than the Light
wherewith the Paper is illuminated, that they shall both appear exactly
alike in Whiteness. For when I was trying this, a Friend coming to visit
me, I stopp'd him at the Door, and before I told him what the Colours
were, or what I was doing; I asked him, Which of the two Whites were the
best, and wherein they differed? And after he had at that distance
viewed them well, he answer'd, that they were both good Whites, and that
he could not say which was best, nor wherein their Colours differed.
Now, if you consider, that this White of the Powder in the Sun-shine was
compounded of the Colours which the component Powders (Orpiment, Purple,
Bise, and _Viride Æris_) have in the same Sun-shine, you must
acknowledge by this Experiment, as well as by the former, that perfect
Whiteness may be compounded of Colours.

From what has been said it is also evident, that the Whiteness of the
Sun's Light is compounded of all the Colours wherewith the several sorts
of Rays whereof that Light consists, when by their several
Refrangibilities they are separated from one another, do tinge Paper or
any other white Body whereon they fall. For those Colours (by _Prop._
II. _Part_ 2.) are unchangeable, and whenever all those Rays with those
their Colours are mix'd again, they reproduce the same white Light as
before.


_PROP._ VI. PROB. II.

_In a mixture of Primary Colours, the Quantity and Quality of each being
given, to know the Colour of the Compound._

[Illustration: FIG. 11.]

With the Center O [in _Fig._ 11.] and Radius OD describe a Circle ADF,
and distinguish its Circumference into seven Parts DE, EF, FG, GA, AB,
BC, CD, proportional to the seven Musical Tones or Intervals of the
eight Sounds, _Sol_, _la_, _fa_, _sol_, _la_, _mi_, _fa_, _sol_,
contained in an eight, that is, proportional to the Number 1/9, 1/16,
1/10, 1/9, 1/16, 1/16, 1/9. Let the first Part DE represent a red
Colour, the second EF orange, the third FG yellow, the fourth CA green,
the fifth AB blue, the sixth BC indigo, and the seventh CD violet. And
conceive that these are all the Colours of uncompounded Light gradually
passing into one another, as they do when made by Prisms; the
Circumference DEFGABCD, representing the whole Series of Colours from
one end of the Sun's colour'd Image to the other, so that from D to E be
all degrees of red, at E the mean Colour between red and orange, from E
to F all degrees of orange, at F the mean between orange and yellow,
from F to G all degrees of yellow, and so on. Let _p_ be the Center of
Gravity of the Arch DE, and _q_, _r_, _s_, _t_, _u_, _x_, the Centers of
Gravity of the Arches EF, FG, GA, AB, BC, and CD respectively, and about
those Centers of Gravity let Circles proportional to the Number of Rays
of each Colour in the given Mixture be describ'd: that is, the Circle
_p_ proportional to the Number of the red-making Rays in the Mixture,
the Circle _q_ proportional to the Number of the orange-making Rays in
the Mixture, and so of the rest. Find the common Center of Gravity of
all those Circles, _p_, _q_, _r_, _s_, _t_, _u_, _x_. Let that Center be
Z; and from the Center of the Circle ADF, through Z to the
Circumference, drawing the Right Line OY, the Place of the Point Y in
the Circumference shall shew the Colour arising from the Composition of
all the Colours in the given Mixture, and the Line OZ shall be
proportional to the Fulness or Intenseness of the Colour, that is, to
its distance from Whiteness. As if Y fall in the middle between F and G,
the compounded Colour shall be the best yellow; if Y verge from the
middle towards F or G, the compound Colour shall accordingly be a
yellow, verging towards orange or green. If Z fall upon the
Circumference, the Colour shall be intense and florid in the highest
Degree; if it fall in the mid-way between the Circumference and Center,
it shall be but half so intense, that is, it shall be such a Colour as
would be made by diluting the intensest yellow with an equal quantity of
whiteness; and if it fall upon the center O, the Colour shall have lost
all its intenseness, and become a white. But it is to be noted, That if
the point Z fall in or near the line OD, the main ingredients being the
red and violet, the Colour compounded shall not be any of the prismatick
Colours, but a purple, inclining to red or violet, accordingly as the
point Z lieth on the side of the line DO towards E or towards C, and in
general the compounded violet is more bright and more fiery than the
uncompounded. Also if only two of the primary Colours which in the
circle are opposite to one another be mixed in an equal proportion, the
point Z shall fall upon the center O, and yet the Colour compounded of
those two shall not be perfectly white, but some faint anonymous Colour.
For I could never yet by mixing only two primary Colours produce a
perfect white. Whether it may be compounded of a mixture of three taken
at equal distances in the circumference I do not know, but of four or
five I do not much question but it may. But these are Curiosities of
little or no moment to the understanding the Phænomena of Nature. For in
all whites produced by Nature, there uses to be a mixture of all sorts
of Rays, and by consequence a composition of all Colours.

To give an instance of this Rule; suppose a Colour is compounded of
these homogeneal Colours, of violet one part, of indigo one part, of
blue two parts, of green three parts, of yellow five parts, of orange
six parts, and of red ten parts. Proportional to these parts describe
the Circles _x_, _v_, _t_, _s_, _r_, _q_, _p_, respectively, that is, so
that if the Circle _x_ be one, the Circle _v_ may be one, the Circle _t_
two, the Circle _s_ three, and the Circles _r_, _q_ and _p_, five, six
and ten. Then I find Z the common center of gravity of these Circles,
and through Z drawing the Line OY, the Point Y falls upon the
circumference between E and F, something nearer to E than to F, and
thence I conclude, that the Colour compounded of these Ingredients will
be an orange, verging a little more to red than to yellow. Also I find
that OZ is a little less than one half of OY, and thence I conclude,
that this orange hath a little less than half the fulness or intenseness
of an uncompounded orange; that is to say, that it is such an orange as
may be made by mixing an homogeneal orange with a good white in the
proportion of the Line OZ to the Line ZY, this Proportion being not of
the quantities of mixed orange and white Powders, but of the quantities
of the Lights reflected from them.

This Rule I conceive accurate enough for practice, though not
mathematically accurate; and the truth of it may be sufficiently proved
to Sense, by stopping any of the Colours at the Lens in the tenth
Experiment of this Book. For the rest of the Colours which are not
stopp'd, but pass on to the Focus of the Lens, will there compound
either accurately or very nearly such a Colour, as by this Rule ought to
result from their Mixture.


_PROP._ VII. THEOR. V.

_All the Colours in the Universe which are made by Light, and depend not
on the Power of Imagination, are either the Colours of homogeneal
Lights, or compounded of these, and that either accurately or very
nearly, according to the Rule of the foregoing Problem._

For it has been proved (in _Prop. 1. Part 2._) that the changes of
Colours made by Refractions do not arise from any new Modifications of
the Rays impress'd by those Refractions, and by the various Terminations
of Light and Shadow, as has been the constant and general Opinion of
Philosophers. It has also been proved that the several Colours of the
homogeneal Rays do constantly answer to their degrees of Refrangibility,
(_Prop._ 1. _Part_ 1. and _Prop._ 2. _Part_ 2.) and that their degrees
of Refrangibility cannot be changed by Refractions and Reflexions
(_Prop._ 2. _Part_ 1.) and by consequence that those their Colours are
likewise immutable. It has also been proved directly by refracting and
reflecting homogeneal Lights apart, that their Colours cannot be
changed, (_Prop._ 2. _Part_ 2.) It has been proved also, that when the
several sorts of Rays are mixed, and in crossing pass through the same
space, they do not act on one another so as to change each others
colorific qualities. (_Exper._ 10. _Part_ 2.) but by mixing their
Actions in the Sensorium beget a Sensation differing from what either
would do apart, that is a Sensation of a mean Colour between their
proper Colours; and particularly when by the concourse and mixtures of
all sorts of Rays, a white Colour is produced, the white is a mixture of
all the Colours which the Rays would have apart, (_Prop._ 5. _Part_ 2.)
The Rays in that mixture do not lose or alter their several colorific
qualities, but by all their various kinds of Actions mix'd in the
Sensorium, beget a Sensation of a middling Colour between all their
Colours, which is whiteness. For whiteness is a mean between all
Colours, having it self indifferently to them all, so as with equal
facility to be tinged with any of them. A red Powder mixed with a little
blue, or a blue with a little red, doth not presently lose its Colour,
but a white Powder mix'd with any Colour is presently tinged with that
Colour, and is equally capable of being tinged with any Colour whatever.
It has been shewed also, that as the Sun's Light is mix'd of all sorts
of Rays, so its whiteness is a mixture of the Colours of all sorts of
Rays; those Rays having from the beginning their several colorific
qualities as well as their several Refrangibilities, and retaining them
perpetually unchanged notwithstanding any Refractions or Reflexions they
may at any time suffer, and that whenever any sort of the Sun's Rays is
by any means (as by Reflexion in _Exper._ 9, and 10. _Part_ 1. or by
Refraction as happens in all Refractions) separated from the rest, they
then manifest their proper Colours. These things have been prov'd, and
the sum of all this amounts to the Proposition here to be proved. For if
the Sun's Light is mix'd of several sorts of Rays, each of which have
originally their several Refrangibilities and colorific Qualities, and
notwithstanding their Refractions and Reflexions, and their various
Separations or Mixtures, keep those their original Properties
perpetually the same without alteration; then all the Colours in the
World must be such as constantly ought to arise from the original
colorific qualities of the Rays whereof the Lights consist by which
those Colours are seen. And therefore if the reason of any Colour
whatever be required, we have nothing else to do than to consider how
the Rays in the Sun's Light have by Reflexions or Refractions, or other
causes, been parted from one another, or mixed together; or otherwise to
find out what sorts of Rays are in the Light by which that Colour is
made, and in what Proportion; and then by the last Problem to learn the
Colour which ought to arise by mixing those Rays (or their Colours) in
that proportion. I speak here of Colours so far as they arise from
Light. For they appear sometimes by other Causes, as when by the power
of Phantasy we see Colours in a Dream, or a Mad-man sees things before
him which are not there; or when we see Fire by striking the Eye, or see
Colours like the Eye of a Peacock's Feather, by pressing our Eyes in
either corner whilst we look the other way. Where these and such like
Causes interpose not, the Colour always answers to the sort or sorts of
the Rays whereof the Light consists, as I have constantly found in
whatever Phænomena of Colours I have hitherto been able to examine. I
shall in the following Propositions give instances of this in the
Phænomena of chiefest note.


_PROP._ VIII. PROB. III.

_By the discovered Properties of Light to explain the Colours made by
Prisms._

Let ABC [in _Fig._ 12.] represent a Prism refracting the Light of the
Sun, which comes into a dark Chamber through a hole F[Greek: ph] almost
as broad as the Prism, and let MN represent a white Paper on which the
refracted Light is cast, and suppose the most refrangible or deepest
violet-making Rays fall upon the Space P[Greek: p], the least
refrangible or deepest red-making Rays upon the Space T[Greek: t], the
middle sort between the indigo-making and blue-making Rays upon the
Space Q[Greek: ch], the middle sort of the green-making Rays upon the
Space R, the middle sort between the yellow-making and orange-making
Rays upon the Space S[Greek: s], and other intermediate sorts upon
intermediate Spaces. For so the Spaces upon which the several sorts
adequately fall will by reason of the different Refrangibility of those
sorts be one lower than another. Now if the Paper MN be so near the
Prism that the Spaces PT and [Greek: pt] do not interfere with one
another, the distance between them T[Greek: p] will be illuminated by
all the sorts of Rays in that proportion to one another which they have
at their very first coming out of the Prism, and consequently be white.
But the Spaces PT and [Greek: pt] on either hand, will not be
illuminated by them all, and therefore will appear coloured. And
particularly at P, where the outmost violet-making Rays fall alone, the
Colour must be the deepest violet. At Q where the violet-making and
indigo-making Rays are mixed, it must be a violet inclining much to
indigo. At R where the violet-making, indigo-making, blue-making, and
one half of the green-making Rays are mixed, their Colours must (by the
construction of the second Problem) compound a middle Colour between
indigo and blue. At S where all the Rays are mixed, except the
red-making and orange-making, their Colours ought by the same Rule to
compound a faint blue, verging more to green than indigo. And in the
progress from S to T, this blue will grow more and more faint and
dilute, till at T, where all the Colours begin to be mixed, it ends in
whiteness.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.]

So again, on the other side of the white at [Greek: t], where the least
refrangible or utmost red-making Rays are alone, the Colour must be the
deepest red. At [Greek: s] the mixture of red and orange will compound a
red inclining to orange. At [Greek: r] the mixture of red, orange,
yellow, and one half of the green must compound a middle Colour between
orange and yellow. At [Greek: ch] the mixture of all Colours but violet
and indigo will compound a faint yellow, verging more to green than to
orange. And this yellow will grow more faint and dilute continually in
its progress from [Greek: ch] to [Greek: p], where by a mixture of all
sorts of Rays it will become white.

These Colours ought to appear were the Sun's Light perfectly white: But
because it inclines to yellow, the Excess of the yellow-making Rays
whereby 'tis tinged with that Colour, being mixed with the faint blue
between S and T, will draw it to a faint green. And so the Colours in
order from P to [Greek: t] ought to be violet, indigo, blue, very faint
green, white, faint yellow, orange, red. Thus it is by the computation:
And they that please to view the Colours made by a Prism will find it so
in Nature.

These are the Colours on both sides the white when the Paper is held
between the Prism and the Point X where the Colours meet, and the
interjacent white vanishes. For if the Paper be held still farther off
from the Prism, the most refrangible and least refrangible Rays will be
wanting in the middle of the Light, and the rest of the Rays which are
found there, will by mixture produce a fuller green than before. Also
the yellow and blue will now become less compounded, and by consequence
more intense than before. And this also agrees with experience.

And if one look through a Prism upon a white Object encompassed with
blackness or darkness, the reason of the Colours arising on the edges is
much the same, as will appear to one that shall a little consider it. If
a black Object be encompassed with a white one, the Colours which appear
through the Prism are to be derived from the Light of the white one,
spreading into the Regions of the black, and therefore they appear in a
contrary order to that, when a white Object is surrounded with black.
And the same is to be understood when an Object is viewed, whose parts
are some of them less luminous than others. For in the borders of the
more and less luminous Parts, Colours ought always by the same
Principles to arise from the Excess of the Light of the more luminous,
and to be of the same kind as if the darker parts were black, but yet to
be more faint and dilute.

What is said of Colours made by Prisms may be easily applied to Colours
made by the Glasses of Telescopes or Microscopes, or by the Humours of
the Eye. For if the Object-glass of a Telescope be thicker on one side
than on the other, or if one half of the Glass, or one half of the Pupil
of the Eye be cover'd with any opake substance; the Object-glass, or
that part of it or of the Eye which is not cover'd, may be consider'd as
a Wedge with crooked Sides, and every Wedge of Glass or other pellucid
Substance has the effect of a Prism in refracting the Light which passes
through it.[L]

How the Colours in the ninth and tenth Experiments of the first Part
arise from the different Reflexibility of Light, is evident by what was
there said. But it is observable in the ninth Experiment, that whilst
the Sun's direct Light is yellow, the Excess of the blue-making Rays in
the reflected beam of Light MN, suffices only to bring that yellow to a
pale white inclining to blue, and not to tinge it with a manifestly blue
Colour. To obtain therefore a better blue, I used instead of the yellow
Light of the Sun the white Light of the Clouds, by varying a little the
Experiment, as follows.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.]

_Exper._ 16 Let HFG [in _Fig._ 13.] represent a Prism in the open Air,
and S the Eye of the Spectator, viewing the Clouds by their Light coming
into the Prism at the Plane Side FIGK, and reflected in it by its Base
HEIG, and thence going out through its Plane Side HEFK to the Eye. And
when the Prism and Eye are conveniently placed, so that the Angles of
Incidence and Reflexion at the Base may be about 40 Degrees, the
Spectator will see a Bow MN of a blue Colour, running from one End of
the Base to the other, with the Concave Side towards him, and the Part
of the Base IMNG beyond this Bow will be brighter than the other Part
EMNH on the other Side of it. This blue Colour MN being made by nothing
else than by Reflexion of a specular Superficies, seems so odd a
Phænomenon, and so difficult to be explained by the vulgar Hypothesis of
Philosophers, that I could not but think it deserved to be taken Notice
of. Now for understanding the Reason of it, suppose the Plane ABC to cut
the Plane Sides and Base of the Prism perpendicularly. From the Eye to
the Line BC, wherein that Plane cuts the Base, draw the Lines S_p_ and
S_t_, in the Angles S_pc_ 50 degr. 1/9, and S_tc_ 49 degr. 1/28, and the
Point _p_ will be the Limit beyond which none of the most refrangible
Rays can pass through the Base of the Prism, and be refracted, whose
Incidence is such that they may be reflected to the Eye; and the Point
_t_ will be the like Limit for the least refrangible Rays, that is,
beyond which none of them can pass through the Base, whose Incidence is
such that by Reflexion they may come to the Eye. And the Point _r_ taken
in the middle Way between _p_ and _t_, will be the like Limit for the
meanly refrangible Rays. And therefore all the least refrangible Rays
which fall upon the Base beyond _t_, that is, between _t_ and B, and can
come from thence to the Eye, will be reflected thither: But on this side
_t_, that is, between _t_ and _c_, many of these Rays will be
transmitted through the Base. And all the most refrangible Rays which
fall upon the Base beyond _p_, that is, between, _p_ and B, and can by
Reflexion come from thence to the Eye, will be reflected thither, but
every where between _p_ and _c_, many of these Rays will get through the
Base, and be refracted; and the same is to be understood of the meanly
refrangible Rays on either side of the Point _r_. Whence it follows,
that the Base of the Prism must every where between _t_ and B, by a
total Reflexion of all sorts of Rays to the Eye, look white and bright.
And every where between _p_ and C, by reason of the Transmission of many
Rays of every sort, look more pale, obscure, and dark. But at _r_, and
in other Places between _p_ and _t_, where all the more refrangible Rays
are reflected to the Eye, and many of the less refrangible are
transmitted, the Excess of the most refrangible in the reflected Light
will tinge that Light with their Colour, which is violet and blue. And
this happens by taking the Line C _prt_ B any where between the Ends of
the Prism HG and EI.


_PROP._ IX. PROB. IV.

_By the discovered Properties of Light to explain the Colours of the
Rain-bow._

[Illustration: FIG. 14.]

This Bow never appears, but where it rains in the Sun-shine, and may be
made artificially by spouting up Water which may break aloft, and
scatter into Drops, and fall down like Rain. For the Sun shining upon
these Drops certainly causes the Bow to appear to a Spectator standing
in a due Position to the Rain and Sun. And hence it is now agreed upon,
that this Bow is made by Refraction of the Sun's Light in drops of
falling Rain. This was understood by some of the Antients, and of late
more fully discover'd and explain'd by the famous _Antonius de Dominis_
Archbishop of _Spalato_, in his book _De Radiis Visûs & Lucis_,
published by his Friend _Bartolus_ at _Venice_, in the Year 1611, and
written above 20 Years before. For he teaches there how the interior Bow
is made in round Drops of Rain by two Refractions of the Sun's Light,
and one Reflexion between them, and the exterior by two Refractions, and
two sorts of Reflexions between them in each Drop of Water, and proves
his Explications by Experiments made with a Phial full of Water, and
with Globes of Glass filled with Water, and placed in the Sun to make
the Colours of the two Bows appear in them. The same Explication
_Des-Cartes_ hath pursued in his Meteors, and mended that of the
exterior Bow. But whilst they understood not the true Origin of Colours,
it's necessary to pursue it here a little farther. For understanding
therefore how the Bow is made, let a Drop of Rain, or any other
spherical transparent Body be represented by the Sphere BNFG, [in _Fig._
14.] described with the Center C, and Semi-diameter CN. And let AN be
one of the Sun's Rays incident upon it at N, and thence refracted to F,
where let it either go out of the Sphere by Refraction towards V, or be
reflected to G; and at G let it either go out by Refraction to R, or be
reflected to H; and at H let it go out by Refraction towards S, cutting
the incident Ray in Y. Produce AN and RG, till they meet in X, and upon
AX and NF, let fall the Perpendiculars CD and CE, and produce CD till it
fall upon the Circumference at L. Parallel to the incident Ray AN draw
the Diameter BQ, and let the Sine of Incidence out of Air into Water be
to the Sine of Refraction as I to R. Now, if you suppose the Point of
Incidence N to move from the Point B, continually till it come to L, the
Arch QF will first increase and then decrease, and so will the Angle AXR
which the Rays AN and GR contain; and the Arch QF and Angle AXR will be
biggest when ND is to CN as sqrt(II - RR) to sqrt(3)RR, in which
case NE will be to ND as 2R to I. Also the Angle AYS, which the Rays AN
and HS contain will first decrease, and then increase and grow least
when ND is to CN as sqrt(II - RR) to sqrt(8)RR, in which case NE
will be to ND, as 3R to I. And so the Angle which the next emergent Ray
(that is, the emergent Ray after three Reflexions) contains with the
incident Ray AN will come to its Limit when ND is to CN as sqrt(II -
RR) to sqrt(15)RR, in which case NE will be to ND as 4R to I. And the
Angle which the Ray next after that Emergent, that is, the Ray emergent
after four Reflexions, contains with the Incident, will come to its
Limit, when ND is to CN as sqrt(II - RR) to sqrt(24)RR, in which
case NE will be to ND as 5R to I; and so on infinitely, the Numbers 3,
8, 15, 24, &c. being gather'd by continual Addition of the Terms of the
arithmetical Progression 3, 5, 7, 9, &c. The Truth of all this
Mathematicians will easily examine.[M]

Now it is to be observed, that as when the Sun comes to his Tropicks,
Days increase and decrease but a very little for a great while together;
so when by increasing the distance CD, these Angles come to their
Limits, they vary their quantity but very little for some time together,
and therefore a far greater number of the Rays which fall upon all the
Points N in the Quadrant BL, shall emerge in the Limits of these Angles,
than in any other Inclinations. And farther it is to be observed, that
the Rays which differ in Refrangibility will have different Limits of
their Angles of Emergence, and by consequence according to their
different Degrees of Refrangibility emerge most copiously in different
Angles, and being separated from one another appear each in their proper
Colours. And what those Angles are may be easily gather'd from the
foregoing Theorem by Computation.

For in the least refrangible Rays the Sines I and R (as was found above)
are 108 and 81, and thence by Computation the greatest Angle AXR will be
found 42 Degrees and 2 Minutes, and the least Angle AYS, 50 Degrees and
57 Minutes. And in the most refrangible Rays the Sines I and R are 109
and 81, and thence by Computation the greatest Angle AXR will be found
40 Degrees and 17 Minutes, and the least Angle AYS 54 Degrees and 7
Minutes.

Suppose now that O [in _Fig._ 15.] is the Spectator's Eye, and OP a Line
drawn parallel to the Sun's Rays and let POE, POF, POG, POH, be Angles
of 40 Degr. 17 Min. 42 Degr. 2 Min. 50 Degr. 57 Min. and 54 Degr. 7 Min.
respectively, and these Angles turned about their common Side OP, shall
with their other Sides OE, OF; OG, OH, describe the Verges of two
Rain-bows AF, BE and CHDG. For if E, F, G, H, be drops placed any where
in the conical Superficies described by OE, OF, OG, OH, and be
illuminated by the Sun's Rays SE, SF, SG, SH; the Angle SEO being equal
to the Angle POE, or 40 Degr. 17 Min. shall be the greatest Angle in
which the most refrangible Rays can after one Reflexion be refracted to
the Eye, and therefore all the Drops in the Line OE shall send the most
refrangible Rays most copiously to the Eye, and thereby strike the
Senses with the deepest violet Colour in that Region. And in like
manner the Angle SFO being equal to the Angle POF, or 42 Degr. 2 Min.
shall be the greatest in which the least refrangible Rays after one
Reflexion can emerge out of the Drops, and therefore those Rays shall
come most copiously to the Eye from the Drops in the Line OF, and strike
the Senses with the deepest red Colour in that Region. And by the same
Argument, the Rays which have intermediate Degrees of Refrangibility
shall come most copiously from Drops between E and F, and strike the
Senses with the intermediate Colours, in the Order which their Degrees
of Refrangibility require, that is in the Progress from E to F, or from
the inside of the Bow to the outside in this order, violet, indigo,
blue, green, yellow, orange, red. But the violet, by the mixture of the
white Light of the Clouds, will appear faint and incline to purple.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.]

Again, the Angle SGO being equal to the Angle POG, or 50 Gr. 51 Min.
shall be the least Angle in which the least refrangible Rays can after
two Reflexions emerge out of the Drops, and therefore the least
refrangible Rays shall come most copiously to the Eye from the Drops in
the Line OG, and strike the Sense with the deepest red in that Region.
And the Angle SHO being equal to the Angle POH, or 54 Gr. 7 Min. shall
be the least Angle, in which the most refrangible Rays after two
Reflexions can emerge out of the Drops; and therefore those Rays shall
come most copiously to the Eye from the Drops in the Line OH, and strike
the Senses with the deepest violet in that Region. And by the same
Argument, the Drops in the Regions between G and H shall strike the
Sense with the intermediate Colours in the Order which their Degrees of
Refrangibility require, that is, in the Progress from G to H, or from
the inside of the Bow to the outside in this order, red, orange, yellow,
green, blue, indigo, violet. And since these four Lines OE, OF, OG, OH,
may be situated any where in the above-mention'd conical Superficies;
what is said of the Drops and Colours in these Lines is to be understood
of the Drops and Colours every where in those Superficies.

Thus shall there be made two Bows of Colours, an interior and stronger,
by one Reflexion in the Drops, and an exterior and fainter by two; for
the Light becomes fainter by every Reflexion. And their Colours shall
lie in a contrary Order to one another, the red of both Bows bordering
upon the Space GF, which is between the Bows. The Breadth of the
interior Bow EOF measured cross the Colours shall be 1 Degr. 45 Min. and
the Breadth of the exterior GOH shall be 3 Degr. 10 Min. and the
distance between them GOF shall be 8 Gr. 15 Min. the greatest
Semi-diameter of the innermost, that is, the Angle POF being 42 Gr. 2
Min. and the least Semi-diameter of the outermost POG, being 50 Gr. 57
Min. These are the Measures of the Bows, as they would be were the Sun
but a Point; for by the Breadth of his Body, the Breadth of the Bows
will be increased, and their Distance decreased by half a Degree, and so
the breadth of the interior Iris will be 2 Degr. 15 Min. that of the
exterior 3 Degr. 40 Min. their distance 8 Degr. 25 Min. the greatest
Semi-diameter of the interior Bow 42 Degr. 17 Min. and the least of the
exterior 50 Degr. 42 Min. And such are the Dimensions of the Bows in the
Heavens found to be very nearly, when their Colours appear strong and
perfect. For once, by such means as I then had, I measured the greatest
Semi-diameter of the interior Iris about 42 Degrees, and the breadth of
the red, yellow and green in that Iris 63 or 64 Minutes, besides the
outmost faint red obscured by the brightness of the Clouds, for which we
may allow 3 or 4 Minutes more. The breadth of the blue was about 40
Minutes more besides the violet, which was so much obscured by the
brightness of the Clouds, that I could not measure its breadth. But
supposing the breadth of the blue and violet together to equal that of
the red, yellow and green together, the whole breadth of this Iris will
be about 2-1/4 Degrees, as above. The least distance between this Iris
and the exterior Iris was about 8 Degrees and 30 Minutes. The exterior
Iris was broader than the interior, but so faint, especially on the blue
side, that I could not measure its breadth distinctly. At another time
when both Bows appeared more distinct, I measured the breadth of the
interior Iris 2 Gr. 10´, and the breadth of the red, yellow and green in
the exterior Iris, was to the breadth of the same Colours in the
interior as 3 to 2.

This Explication of the Rain-bow is yet farther confirmed by the known
Experiment (made by _Antonius de Dominis_ and _Des-Cartes_) of hanging
up any where in the Sun-shine a Glass Globe filled with Water, and
viewing it in such a posture, that the Rays which come from the Globe to
the Eye may contain with the Sun's Rays an Angle of either 42 or 50
Degrees. For if the Angle be about 42 or 43 Degrees, the Spectator
(suppose at O) shall see a full red Colour in that side of the Globe
opposed to the Sun as 'tis represented at F, and if that Angle become
less (suppose by depressing the Globe to E) there will appear other
Colours, yellow, green and blue successive in the same side of the
Globe. But if the Angle be made about 50 Degrees (suppose by lifting up
the Globe to G) there will appear a red Colour in that side of the Globe
towards the Sun, and if the Angle be made greater (suppose by lifting
up the Globe to H) the red will turn successively to the other Colours,
yellow, green and blue. The same thing I have tried, by letting a Globe
rest, and raising or depressing the Eye, or otherwise moving it to make
the Angle of a just magnitude.

I have heard it represented, that if the Light of a Candle be refracted
by a Prism to the Eye; when the blue Colour falls upon the Eye, the
Spectator shall see red in the Prism, and when the red falls upon the
Eye he shall see blue; and if this were certain, the Colours of the
Globe and Rain-bow ought to appear in a contrary order to what we find.
But the Colours of the Candle being very faint, the mistake seems to
arise from the difficulty of discerning what Colours fall on the Eye.
For, on the contrary, I have sometimes had occasion to observe in the
Sun's Light refracted by a Prism, that the Spectator always sees that
Colour in the Prism which falls upon his Eye. And the same I have found
true also in Candle-light. For when the Prism is moved slowly from the
Line which is drawn directly from the Candle to the Eye, the red appears
first in the Prism and then the blue, and therefore each of them is seen
when it falls upon the Eye. For the red passes over the Eye first, and
then the blue.

The Light which comes through drops of Rain by two Refractions without
any Reflexion, ought to appear strongest at the distance of about 26
Degrees from the Sun, and to decay gradually both ways as the distance
from him increases and decreases. And the same is to be understood of
Light transmitted through spherical Hail-stones. And if the Hail be a
little flatted, as it often is, the Light transmitted may grow so strong
at a little less distance than that of 26 Degrees, as to form a Halo
about the Sun or Moon; which Halo, as often as the Hail-stones are duly
figured may be colour'd, and then it must be red within by the least
refrangible Rays, and blue without by the most refrangible ones,
especially if the Hail-stones have opake Globules of Snow in their
center to intercept the Light within the Halo (as _Hugenius_ has
observ'd) and make the inside thereof more distinctly defined than it
would otherwise be. For such Hail-stones, though spherical, by
terminating the Light by the Snow, may make a Halo red within and
colourless without, and darker in the red than without, as Halos used to
be. For of those Rays which pass close by the Snow the Rubriform will be
least refracted, and so come to the Eye in the directest Lines.

The Light which passes through a drop of Rain after two Refractions, and
three or more Reflexions, is scarce strong enough to cause a sensible
Bow; but in those Cylinders of Ice by which _Hugenius_ explains the
_Parhelia_, it may perhaps be sensible.


_PROP._ X. PROB. V.

_By the discovered Properties of Light to explain the permanent Colours
of Natural Bodies._

These Colours arise from hence, that some natural Bodies reflect some
sorts of Rays, others other sorts more copiously than the rest. Minium
reflects the least refrangible or red-making Rays most copiously, and
thence appears red. Violets reflect the most refrangible most copiously,
and thence have their Colour, and so of other Bodies. Every Body
reflects the Rays of its own Colour more copiously than the rest, and
from their excess and predominance in the reflected Light has its
Colour.

_Exper._ 17. For if in the homogeneal Lights obtained by the solution of
the Problem proposed in the fourth Proposition of the first Part of this
Book, you place Bodies of several Colours, you will find, as I have
done, that every Body looks most splendid and luminous in the Light of
its own Colour. Cinnaber in the homogeneal red Light is most
resplendent, in the green Light it is manifestly less resplendent, and
in the blue Light still less. Indigo in the violet blue Light is most
resplendent, and its splendor is gradually diminish'd, as it is removed
thence by degrees through the green and yellow Light to the red. By a
Leek the green Light, and next that the blue and yellow which compound
green, are more strongly reflected than the other Colours red and
violet, and so of the rest. But to make these Experiments the more
manifest, such Bodies ought to be chosen as have the fullest and most
vivid Colours, and two of those Bodies are to be compared together.
Thus, for instance, if Cinnaber and _ultra_-marine blue, or some other
full blue be held together in the red homogeneal Light, they will both
appear red, but the Cinnaber will appear of a strongly luminous and
resplendent red, and the _ultra_-marine blue of a faint obscure and dark
red; and if they be held together in the blue homogeneal Light, they
will both appear blue, but the _ultra_-marine will appear of a strongly
luminous and resplendent blue, and the Cinnaber of a faint and dark
blue. Which puts it out of dispute that the Cinnaber reflects the red
Light much more copiously than the _ultra_-marine doth, and the
_ultra_-marine reflects the blue Light much more copiously than the
Cinnaber doth. The same Experiment may be tried successfully with red
Lead and Indigo, or with any other two colour'd Bodies, if due allowance
be made for the different strength or weakness of their Colour and
Light.

And as the reason of the Colours of natural Bodies is evident by these
Experiments, so it is farther confirmed and put past dispute by the two
first Experiments of the first Part, whereby 'twas proved in such Bodies
that the reflected Lights which differ in Colours do differ also in
degrees of Refrangibility. For thence it's certain, that some Bodies
reflect the more refrangible, others the less refrangible Rays more
copiously.

And that this is not only a true reason of these Colours, but even the
only reason, may appear farther from this Consideration, that the Colour
of homogeneal Light cannot be changed by the Reflexion of natural
Bodies.

For if Bodies by Reflexion cannot in the least change the Colour of any
one sort of Rays, they cannot appear colour'd by any other means than by
reflecting those which either are of their own Colour, or which by
mixture must produce it.

But in trying Experiments of this kind care must be had that the Light
be sufficiently homogeneal. For if Bodies be illuminated by the ordinary
prismatick Colours, they will appear neither of their own Day-light
Colours, nor of the Colour of the Light cast on them, but of some middle
Colour between both, as I have found by Experience. Thus red Lead (for
instance) illuminated with the ordinary prismatick green will not appear
either red or green, but orange or yellow, or between yellow and green,
accordingly as the green Light by which 'tis illuminated is more or less
compounded. For because red Lead appears red when illuminated with white
Light, wherein all sorts of Rays are equally mix'd, and in the green
Light all sorts of Rays are not equally mix'd, the Excess of the
yellow-making, green-making and blue-making Rays in the incident green
Light, will cause those Rays to abound so much in the reflected Light,
as to draw the Colour from red towards their Colour. And because the red
Lead reflects the red-making Rays most copiously in proportion to their
number, and next after them the orange-making and yellow-making Rays;
these Rays in the reflected Light will be more in proportion to the
Light than they were in the incident green Light, and thereby will draw
the reflected Light from green towards their Colour. And therefore the
red Lead will appear neither red nor green, but of a Colour between
both.

In transparently colour'd Liquors 'tis observable, that their Colour
uses to vary with their thickness. Thus, for instance, a red Liquor in a
conical Glass held between the Light and the Eye, looks of a pale and
dilute yellow at the bottom where 'tis thin, and a little higher where
'tis thicker grows orange, and where 'tis still thicker becomes red, and
where 'tis thickest the red is deepest and darkest. For it is to be
conceiv'd that such a Liquor stops the indigo-making and violet-making
Rays most easily, the blue-making Rays more difficultly, the
green-making Rays still more difficultly, and the red-making most
difficultly: And that if the thickness of the Liquor be only so much as
suffices to stop a competent number of the violet-making and
indigo-making Rays, without diminishing much the number of the rest, the
rest must (by _Prop._ 6. _Part_ 2.) compound a pale yellow. But if the
Liquor be so much thicker as to stop also a great number of the
blue-making Rays, and some of the green-making, the rest must compound
an orange; and where it is so thick as to stop also a great number of
the green-making and a considerable number of the yellow-making, the
rest must begin to compound a red, and this red must grow deeper and
darker as the yellow-making and orange-making Rays are more and more
stopp'd by increasing the thickness of the Liquor, so that few Rays
besides the red-making can get through.

Of this kind is an Experiment lately related to me by Mr. _Halley_, who,
in diving deep into the Sea in a diving Vessel, found in a clear
Sun-shine Day, that when he was sunk many Fathoms deep into the Water
the upper part of his Hand on which the Sun shone directly through the
Water and through a small Glass Window in the Vessel appeared of a red
Colour, like that of a Damask Rose, and the Water below and the under
part of his Hand illuminated by Light reflected from the Water below
look'd green. For thence it may be gather'd, that the Sea-Water reflects
back the violet and blue-making Rays most easily, and lets the
red-making Rays pass most freely and copiously to great Depths. For
thereby the Sun's direct Light at all great Depths, by reason of the
predominating red-making Rays, must appear red; and the greater the
Depth is, the fuller and intenser must that red be. And at such Depths
as the violet-making Rays scarce penetrate unto, the blue-making,
green-making, and yellow-making Rays being reflected from below more
copiously than the red-making ones, must compound a green.

Now, if there be two Liquors of full Colours, suppose a red and blue,
and both of them so thick as suffices to make their Colours sufficiently
full; though either Liquor be sufficiently transparent apart, yet will
you not be able to see through both together. For, if only the
red-making Rays pass through one Liquor, and only the blue-making
through the other, no Rays can pass through both. This Mr. _Hook_ tried
casually with Glass Wedges filled with red and blue Liquors, and was
surprized at the unexpected Event, the reason of it being then unknown;
which makes me trust the more to his Experiment, though I have not tried
it my self. But he that would repeat it, must take care the Liquors be
of very good and full Colours.

Now, whilst Bodies become coloured by reflecting or transmitting this or
that sort of Rays more copiously than the rest, it is to be conceived
that they stop and stifle in themselves the Rays which they do not
reflect or transmit. For, if Gold be foliated and held between your Eye
and the Light, the Light looks of a greenish blue, and therefore massy
Gold lets into its Body the blue-making Rays to be reflected to and fro
within it till they be stopp'd and stifled, whilst it reflects the
yellow-making outwards, and thereby looks yellow. And much after the
same manner that Leaf Gold is yellow by reflected, and blue by
transmitted Light, and massy Gold is yellow in all Positions of the Eye;
there are some Liquors, as the Tincture of _Lignum Nephriticum_, and
some sorts of Glass which transmit one sort of Light most copiously, and
reflect another sort, and thereby look of several Colours, according to
the Position of the Eye to the Light. But, if these Liquors or Glasses
were so thick and massy that no Light could get through them, I question
not but they would like all other opake Bodies appear of one and the
same Colour in all Positions of the Eye, though this I cannot yet affirm
by Experience. For all colour'd Bodies, so far as my Observation
reaches, may be seen through if made sufficiently thin, and therefore
are in some measure transparent, and differ only in degrees of
Transparency from tinged transparent Liquors; these Liquors, as well as
those Bodies, by a sufficient Thickness becoming opake. A transparent
Body which looks of any Colour by transmitted Light, may also look of
the same Colour by reflected Light, the Light of that Colour being
reflected by the farther Surface of the Body, or by the Air beyond it.
And then the reflected Colour will be diminished, and perhaps cease, by
making the Body very thick, and pitching it on the backside to diminish
the Reflexion of its farther Surface, so that the Light reflected from
the tinging Particles may predominate. In such Cases, the Colour of the
reflected Light will be apt to vary from that of the Light transmitted.
But whence it is that tinged Bodies and Liquors reflect some sort of
Rays, and intromit or transmit other sorts, shall be said in the next
Book. In this Proposition I content my self to have put it past dispute,
that Bodies have such Properties, and thence appear colour'd.


_PROP._ XI. PROB. VI.

_By mixing colour'd Lights to compound a beam of Light of the same
Colour and Nature with a beam of the Sun's direct Light, and therein to
experience the Truth of the foregoing Propositions._

[Illustration: FIG. 16.]

Let ABC _abc_ [in _Fig._ 16.] represent a Prism, by which the Sun's
Light let into a dark Chamber through the Hole F, may be refracted
towards the Lens MN, and paint upon it at _p_, _q_, _r_, _s_, and _t_,
the usual Colours violet, blue, green, yellow, and red, and let the
diverging Rays by the Refraction of this Lens converge again towards X,
and there, by the mixture of all those their Colours, compound a white
according to what was shewn above. Then let another Prism DEG _deg_,
parallel to the former, be placed at X, to refract that white Light
upwards towards Y. Let the refracting Angles of the Prisms, and their
distances from the Lens be equal, so that the Rays which converged from
the Lens towards X, and without Refraction, would there have crossed and
diverged again, may by the Refraction of the second Prism be reduced
into Parallelism and diverge no more. For then those Rays will recompose
a beam of white Light XY. If the refracting Angle of either Prism be the
bigger, that Prism must be so much the nearer to the Lens. You will know
when the Prisms and the Lens are well set together, by observing if the
beam of Light XY, which comes out of the second Prism be perfectly white
to the very edges of the Light, and at all distances from the Prism
continue perfectly and totally white like a beam of the Sun's Light. For
till this happens, the Position of the Prisms and Lens to one another
must be corrected; and then if by the help of a long beam of Wood, as is
represented in the Figure, or by a Tube, or some other such Instrument,
made for that Purpose, they be made fast in that Situation, you may try
all the same Experiments in this compounded beam of Light XY, which have
been made in the Sun's direct Light. For this compounded beam of Light
has the same appearance, and is endow'd with all the same Properties
with a direct beam of the Sun's Light, so far as my Observation reaches.
And in trying Experiments in this beam you may by stopping any of the
Colours, _p_, _q_, _r_, _s_, and _t_, at the Lens, see how the Colours
produced in the Experiments are no other than those which the Rays had
at the Lens before they entered the Composition of this Beam: And by
consequence, that they arise not from any new Modifications of the Light
by Refractions and Reflexions, but from the various Separations and
Mixtures of the Rays originally endow'd with their colour-making
Qualities.

So, for instance, having with a Lens 4-1/4 Inches broad, and two Prisms
on either hand 6-1/4 Feet distant from the Lens, made such a beam of
compounded Light; to examine the reason of the Colours made by Prisms, I
refracted this compounded beam of Light XY with another Prism HIK _kh_,
and thereby cast the usual Prismatick Colours PQRST upon the Paper LV
placed behind. And then by stopping any of the Colours _p_, _q_, _r_,
_s_, _t_, at the Lens, I found that the same Colour would vanish at the
Paper. So if the Purple _p_ was stopp'd at the Lens, the Purple P upon
the Paper would vanish, and the rest of the Colours would remain
unalter'd, unless perhaps the blue, so far as some purple latent in it
at the Lens might be separated from it by the following Refractions. And
so by intercepting the green upon the Lens, the green R upon the Paper
would vanish, and so of the rest; which plainly shews, that as the white
beam of Light XY was compounded of several Lights variously colour'd at
the Lens, so the Colours which afterwards emerge out of it by new
Refractions are no other than those of which its Whiteness was
compounded. The Refraction of the Prism HIK _kh_ generates the Colours
PQRST upon the Paper, not by changing the colorific Qualities of the
Rays, but by separating the Rays which had the very same colorific
Qualities before they enter'd the Composition of the refracted beam of
white Light XY. For otherwise the Rays which were of one Colour at the
Lens might be of another upon the Paper, contrary to what we find.

So again, to examine the reason of the Colours of natural Bodies, I
placed such Bodies in the Beam of Light XY, and found that they all
appeared there of those their own Colours which they have in Day-light,
and that those Colours depend upon the Rays which had the same Colours
at the Lens before they enter'd the Composition of that beam. Thus, for
instance, Cinnaber illuminated by this beam appears of the same red
Colour as in Day-light; and if at the Lens you intercept the
green-making and blue-making Rays, its redness will become more full and
lively: But if you there intercept the red-making Rays, it will not any
longer appear red, but become yellow or green, or of some other Colour,
according to the sorts of Rays which you do not intercept. So Gold in
this Light XY appears of the same yellow Colour as in Day-light, but by
intercepting at the Lens a due Quantity of the yellow-making Rays it
will appear white like Silver (as I have tried) which shews that its
yellowness arises from the Excess of the intercepted Rays tinging that
Whiteness with their Colour when they are let pass. So the Infusion of
_Lignum Nephriticum_ (as I have also tried) when held in this beam of
Light XY, looks blue by the reflected Part of the Light, and red by the
transmitted Part of it, as when 'tis view'd in Day-light; but if you
intercept the blue at the Lens the Infusion will lose its reflected blue
Colour, whilst its transmitted red remains perfect, and by the loss of
some blue-making Rays, wherewith it was allay'd, becomes more intense
and full. And, on the contrary, if the red and orange-making Rays be
intercepted at the Lens, the Infusion will lose its transmitted red,
whilst its blue will remain and become more full and perfect. Which
shews, that the Infusion does not tinge the Rays with blue and red, but
only transmits those most copiously which were red-making before, and
reflects those most copiously which were blue-making before. And after
the same manner may the Reasons of other Phænomena be examined, by
trying them in this artificial beam of Light XY.

FOOTNOTES:

[I] See p. 59.

[J] _See our_ Author's Lect. Optic. _Part_ II. _Sect._ II. _p._ 239.

[K] _As is done in our_ Author's Lect. Optic. _Part_ I. _Sect._ III.
_and_ IV. _and Part_ II. _Sect._ II.

[L] _See our_ Author's Lect. Optic. _Part_ II. _Sect._ II. _pag._ 269,
&c.

[M] _This is demonstrated in our_ Author's Lect. Optic. _Part_ I.
_Sect._ IV. _Prop._ 35 _and_ 36.




THE

SECOND BOOK

OF

OPTICKS




_PART I._

_Observations concerning the Reflexions, Refractions, and Colours of
thin transparent Bodies._


It has been observed by others, that transparent Substances, as Glass,
Water, Air, &c. when made very thin by being blown into Bubbles, or
otherwise formed into Plates, do exhibit various Colours according to
their various thinness, altho' at a greater thickness they appear very
clear and colourless. In the former Book I forbore to treat of these
Colours, because they seemed of a more difficult Consideration, and were
not necessary for establishing the Properties of Light there discoursed
of. But because they may conduce to farther Discoveries for compleating
the Theory of Light, especially as to the constitution of the parts of
natural Bodies, on which their Colours or Transparency depend; I have
here set down an account of them. To render this Discourse short and
distinct, I have first described the principal of my Observations, and
then consider'd and made use of them. The Observations are these.

_Obs._ 1. Compressing two Prisms hard together that their sides (which
by chance were a very little convex) might somewhere touch one another:
I found the place in which they touched to become absolutely
transparent, as if they had there been one continued piece of Glass. For
when the Light fell so obliquely on the Air, which in other places was
between them, as to be all reflected; it seemed in that place of contact
to be wholly transmitted, insomuch that when look'd upon, it appeared
like a black or dark spot, by reason that little or no sensible Light
was reflected from thence, as from other places; and when looked through
it seemed (as it were) a hole in that Air which was formed into a thin
Plate, by being compress'd between the Glasses. And through this hole
Objects that were beyond might be seen distinctly, which could not at
all be seen through other parts of the Glasses where the Air was
interjacent. Although the Glasses were a little convex, yet this
transparent spot was of a considerable breadth, which breadth seemed
principally to proceed from the yielding inwards of the parts of the
Glasses, by reason of their mutual pressure. For by pressing them very
hard together it would become much broader than otherwise.

_Obs._ 2. When the Plate of Air, by turning the Prisms about their
common Axis, became so little inclined to the incident Rays, that some
of them began to be transmitted, there arose in it many slender Arcs of
Colours which at first were shaped almost like the Conchoid, as you see
them delineated in the first Figure. And by continuing the Motion of the
Prisms, these Arcs increased and bended more and more about the said
transparent spot, till they were compleated into Circles or Rings
incompassing it, and afterwards continually grew more and more
contracted.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

These Arcs at their first appearance were of a violet and blue Colour,
and between them were white Arcs of Circles, which presently by
continuing the Motion of the Prisms became a little tinged in their
inward Limbs with red and yellow, and to their outward Limbs the blue
was adjacent. So that the order of these Colours from the central dark
spot, was at that time white, blue, violet; black, red, orange, yellow,
white, blue, violet, &c. But the yellow and red were much fainter than
the blue and violet.

The Motion of the Prisms about their Axis being continued, these Colours
contracted more and more, shrinking towards the whiteness on either
side of it, until they totally vanished into it. And then the Circles in
those parts appear'd black and white, without any other Colours
intermix'd. But by farther moving the Prisms about, the Colours again
emerged out of the whiteness, the violet and blue at its inward Limb,
and at its outward Limb the red and yellow. So that now their order from
the central Spot was white, yellow, red; black; violet, blue, white,
yellow, red, &c. contrary to what it was before.

_Obs._ 3. When the Rings or some parts of them appeared only black and
white, they were very distinct and well defined, and the blackness
seemed as intense as that of the central Spot. Also in the Borders of
the Rings, where the Colours began to emerge out of the whiteness, they
were pretty distinct, which made them visible to a very great multitude.
I have sometimes number'd above thirty Successions (reckoning every
black and white Ring for one Succession) and seen more of them, which by
reason of their smalness I could not number. But in other Positions of
the Prisms, at which the Rings appeared of many Colours, I could not
distinguish above eight or nine of them, and the Exterior of those were
very confused and dilute.

In these two Observations to see the Rings distinct, and without any
other Colour than Black and white, I found it necessary to hold my Eye
at a good distance from them. For by approaching nearer, although in the
same inclination of my Eye to the Plane of the Rings, there emerged a
bluish Colour out of the white, which by dilating it self more and more
into the black, render'd the Circles less distinct, and left the white a
little tinged with red and yellow. I found also by looking through a
slit or oblong hole, which was narrower than the pupil of my Eye, and
held close to it parallel to the Prisms, I could see the Circles much
distincter and visible to a far greater number than otherwise.

_Obs._ 4. To observe more nicely the order of the Colours which arose
out of the white Circles as the Rays became less and less inclined to
the Plate of Air; I took two Object-glasses, the one a Plano-convex for
a fourteen Foot Telescope, and the other a large double Convex for one
of about fifty Foot; and upon this, laying the other with its plane side
downwards, I pressed them slowly together, to make the Colours
successively emerge in the middle of the Circles, and then slowly lifted
the upper Glass from the lower to make them successively vanish again in
the same place. The Colour, which by pressing the Glasses together,
emerged last in the middle of the other Colours, would upon its first
appearance look like a Circle of a Colour almost uniform from the
circumference to the center and by compressing the Glasses still more,
grow continually broader until a new Colour emerged in its center, and
thereby it became a Ring encompassing that new Colour. And by
compressing the Glasses still more, the diameter of this Ring would
increase, and the breadth of its Orbit or Perimeter decrease until
another new Colour emerged in the center of the last: And so on until a
third, a fourth, a fifth, and other following new Colours successively
emerged there, and became Rings encompassing the innermost Colour, the
last of which was the black Spot. And, on the contrary, by lifting up
the upper Glass from the lower, the diameter of the Rings would
decrease, and the breadth of their Orbit increase, until their Colours
reached successively to the center; and then they being of a
considerable breadth, I could more easily discern and distinguish their
Species than before. And by this means I observ'd their Succession and
Quantity to be as followeth.

Next to the pellucid central Spot made by the contact of the Glasses
succeeded blue, white, yellow, and red. The blue was so little in
quantity, that I could not discern it in the Circles made by the Prisms,
nor could I well distinguish any violet in it, but the yellow and red
were pretty copious, and seemed about as much in extent as the white,
and four or five times more than the blue. The next Circuit in order of
Colours immediately encompassing these were violet, blue, green, yellow,
and red: and these were all of them copious and vivid, excepting the
green, which was very little in quantity, and seemed much more faint and
dilute than the other Colours. Of the other four, the violet was the
least in extent, and the blue less than the yellow or red. The third
Circuit or Order was purple, blue, green, yellow, and red; in which the
purple seemed more reddish than the violet in the former Circuit, and
the green was much more conspicuous, being as brisk and copious as any
of the other Colours, except the yellow, but the red began to be a
little faded, inclining very much to purple. After this succeeded the
fourth Circuit of green and red. The green was very copious and lively,
inclining on the one side to blue, and on the other side to yellow. But
in this fourth Circuit there was neither violet, blue, nor yellow, and
the red was very imperfect and dirty. Also the succeeding Colours became
more and more imperfect and dilute, till after three or four revolutions
they ended in perfect whiteness. Their form, when the Glasses were most
compress'd so as to make the black Spot appear in the center, is
delineated in the second Figure; where _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_, _e_: _f_,
_g_, _h_, _i_, _k_: _l_, _m_, _n_, _o_, _p_: _q_, _r_: _s_, _t_: _v_,
_x_: _y_, _z_, denote the Colours reckon'd in order from the center,
black, blue, white, yellow, red: violet, blue, green, yellow, red:
purple, blue, green, yellow, red: green, red: greenish blue, red:
greenish blue, pale red: greenish blue, reddish white.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

_Obs._ 5. To determine the interval of the Glasses, or thickness of the
interjacent Air, by which each Colour was produced, I measured the
Diameters of the first six Rings at the most lucid part of their Orbits,
and squaring them, I found their Squares to be in the arithmetical
Progression of the odd Numbers, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11. And since one of
these Glasses was plane, and the other spherical, their Intervals at
those Rings must be in the same Progression. I measured also the
Diameters of the dark or faint Rings between the more lucid Colours, and
found their Squares to be in the arithmetical Progression of the even
Numbers, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12. And it being very nice and difficult to
take these measures exactly; I repeated them divers times at divers
parts of the Glasses, that by their Agreement I might be confirmed in
them. And the same method I used in determining some others of the
following Observations.

_Obs._ 6. The Diameter of the sixth Ring at the most lucid part of its
Orbit was 58/100 parts of an Inch, and the Diameter of the Sphere on
which the double convex Object-glass was ground was about 102 Feet, and
hence I gathered the thickness of the Air or Aereal Interval of the
Glasses at that Ring. But some time after, suspecting that in making
this Observation I had not determined the Diameter of the Sphere with
sufficient accurateness, and being uncertain whether the Plano-convex
Glass was truly plane, and not something concave or convex on that side
which I accounted plane; and whether I had not pressed the Glasses
together, as I often did, to make them touch; (For by pressing such
Glasses together their parts easily yield inwards, and the Rings thereby
become sensibly broader than they would be, did the Glasses keep their
Figures.) I repeated the Experiment, and found the Diameter of the sixth
lucid Ring about 55/100 parts of an Inch. I repeated the Experiment also
with such an Object-glass of another Telescope as I had at hand. This
was a double Convex ground on both sides to one and the same Sphere, and
its Focus was distant from it 83-2/5 Inches. And thence, if the Sines of
Incidence and Refraction of the bright yellow Light be assumed in
proportion as 11 to 17, the Diameter of the Sphere to which the Glass
was figured will by computation be found 182 Inches. This Glass I laid
upon a flat one, so that the black Spot appeared in the middle of the
Rings of Colours without any other Pressure than that of the weight of
the Glass. And now measuring the Diameter of the fifth dark Circle as
accurately as I could, I found it the fifth part of an Inch precisely.
This Measure was taken with the points of a pair of Compasses on the
upper Surface on the upper Glass, and my Eye was about eight or nine
Inches distance from the Glass, almost perpendicularly over it, and the
Glass was 1/6 of an Inch thick, and thence it is easy to collect that
the true Diameter of the Ring between the Glasses was greater than its
measur'd Diameter above the Glasses in the Proportion of 80 to 79, or
thereabouts, and by consequence equal to 16/79 parts of an Inch, and its
true Semi-diameter equal to 8/79 parts. Now as the Diameter of the
Sphere (182 Inches) is to the Semi-diameter of this fifth dark Ring
(8/79 parts of an Inch) so is this Semi-diameter to the thickness of the
Air at this fifth dark Ring; which is therefore 32/567931 or
100/1774784. Parts of an Inch; and the fifth Part thereof, _viz._ the
1/88739 Part of an Inch, is the Thickness of the Air at the first of
these dark Rings.

The same Experiment I repeated with another double convex Object-glass
ground on both sides to one and the same Sphere. Its Focus was distant
from it 168-1/2 Inches, and therefore the Diameter of that Sphere was
184 Inches. This Glass being laid upon the same plain Glass, the
Diameter of the fifth of the dark Rings, when the black Spot in their
Center appear'd plainly without pressing the Glasses, was by the measure
of the Compasses upon the upper Glass 121/600 Parts of an Inch, and by
consequence between the Glasses it was 1222/6000: For the upper Glass
was 1/8 of an Inch thick, and my Eye was distant from it 8 Inches. And a
third proportional to half this from the Diameter of the Sphere is
5/88850 Parts of an Inch. This is therefore the Thickness of the Air at
this Ring, and a fifth Part thereof, _viz._ the 1/88850th Part of an
Inch is the Thickness thereof at the first of the Rings, as above.

I tried the same Thing, by laying these Object-glasses upon flat Pieces
of a broken Looking-glass, and found the same Measures of the Rings:
Which makes me rely upon them till they can be determin'd more
accurately by Glasses ground to larger Spheres, though in such Glasses
greater care must be taken of a true Plane.

These Dimensions were taken, when my Eye was placed almost
perpendicularly over the Glasses, being about an Inch, or an Inch and a
quarter, distant from the incident Rays, and eight Inches distant from
the Glass; so that the Rays were inclined to the Glass in an Angle of
about four Degrees. Whence by the following Observation you will
understand, that had the Rays been perpendicular to the Glasses, the
Thickness of the Air at these Rings would have been less in the
Proportion of the Radius to the Secant of four Degrees, that is, of
10000 to 10024. Let the Thicknesses found be therefore diminish'd in
this Proportion, and they will become 1/88952 and 1/89063, or (to use
the nearest round Number) the 1/89000th Part of an Inch. This is the
Thickness of the Air at the darkest Part of the first dark Ring made by
perpendicular Rays; and half this Thickness multiplied by the
Progression, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, &c. gives the Thicknesses of the Air at
the most luminous Parts of all the brightest Rings, _viz._ 1/178000,
3/178000, 5/178000, 7/178000, &c. their arithmetical Means 2/178000,
4/178000, 6/178000, &c. being its Thicknesses at the darkest Parts of
all the dark ones.

_Obs._ 7. The Rings were least, when my Eye was placed perpendicularly
over the Glasses in the Axis of the Rings: And when I view'd them
obliquely they became bigger, continually swelling as I removed my Eye
farther from the Axis. And partly by measuring the Diameter of the same
Circle at several Obliquities of my Eye, partly by other Means, as also
by making use of the two Prisms for very great Obliquities, I found its
Diameter, and consequently the Thickness of the Air at its Perimeter in
all those Obliquities to be very nearly in the Proportions express'd in
this Table.

-------------------+--------------------+----------+----------
Angle of Incidence |Angle of Refraction |Diameter  |Thickness
        on         |         into       |  of the  |   of the
      the Air.     |       the Air.     |   Ring.  |    Air.
-------------------+--------------------+----------+----------
    Deg.    Min.   |                    |          |
                   |                    |          |
    00      00     |     00      00     |  10      |  10
                   |                    |          |
    06      26     |     10      00     |  10-1/13 |  10-2/13
                   |                    |          |
    12      45     |     20      00     |  10-1/3  |  10-2/3
                   |                    |          |
    18      49     |     30      00     |  10-3/4  |  11-1/2
                   |                    |          |
    24      30     |     40      00     |  11-2/5  |  13
                   |                    |          |
    29      37     |     50      00     |  12-1/2  |  15-1/2
                   |                    |          |
    33      58     |     60      00     |  14      |  20
                   |                    |          |
    35      47     |     65      00     |  15-1/4  |  23-1/4
                   |                    |          |
    37      19     |     70      00     |  16-4/5  |  28-1/4
                   |                    |          |
    38      33     |     75      00     |  19-1/4  |  37
                   |                    |          |
    39      27     |     80      00     |  22-6/7  |  52-1/4
                   |                    |          |
    40      00     |     85      00     |  29      |  84-1/12
                   |                    |          |
    40      11     |     90      00     |  35      | 122-1/2
-------------------+--------------------+----------+----------

In the two first Columns are express'd the Obliquities of the incident
and emergent Rays to the Plate of the Air, that is, their Angles of
Incidence and Refraction. In the third Column the Diameter of any
colour'd Ring at those Obliquities is expressed in Parts, of which ten
constitute that Diameter when the Rays are perpendicular. And in the
fourth Column the Thickness of the Air at the Circumference of that Ring
is expressed in Parts, of which also ten constitute its Thickness when
the Rays are perpendicular.

And from these Measures I seem to gather this Rule: That the Thickness
of the Air is proportional to the Secant of an Angle, whose Sine is a
certain mean Proportional between the Sines of Incidence and Refraction.
And that mean Proportional, so far as by these Measures I can determine
it, is the first of an hundred and six arithmetical mean Proportionals
between those Sines counted from the bigger Sine, that is, from the Sine
of Refraction when the Refraction is made out of the Glass into the
Plate of Air, or from the Sine of Incidence when the Refraction is made
out of the Plate of Air into the Glass.

_Obs._ 8. The dark Spot in the middle of the Rings increased also by the
Obliquation of the Eye, although almost insensibly. But, if instead of
the Object-glasses the Prisms were made use of, its Increase was more
manifest when viewed so obliquely that no Colours appear'd about it. It
was least when the Rays were incident most obliquely on the interjacent
Air, and as the obliquity decreased it increased more and more until the
colour'd Rings appear'd, and then decreased again, but not so much as it
increased before. And hence it is evident, that the Transparency was
not only at the absolute Contact of the Glasses, but also where they had
some little Interval. I have sometimes observed the Diameter of that
Spot to be between half and two fifth parts of the Diameter of the
exterior Circumference of the red in the first Circuit or Revolution of
Colours when view'd almost perpendicularly; whereas when view'd
obliquely it hath wholly vanish'd and become opake and white like the
other parts of the Glass; whence it may be collected that the Glasses
did then scarcely, or not at all, touch one another, and that their
Interval at the perimeter of that Spot when view'd perpendicularly was
about a fifth or sixth part of their Interval at the circumference of
the said red.

_Obs._ 9. By looking through the two contiguous Object-glasses, I found
that the interjacent Air exhibited Rings of Colours, as well by
transmitting Light as by reflecting it. The central Spot was now white,
and from it the order of the Colours were yellowish red; black, violet,
blue, white, yellow, red; violet, blue, green, yellow, red, &c. But
these Colours were very faint and dilute, unless when the Light was
trajected very obliquely through the Glasses: For by that means they
became pretty vivid. Only the first yellowish red, like the blue in the
fourth Observation, was so little and faint as scarcely to be discern'd.
Comparing the colour'd Rings made by Reflexion, with these made by
transmission of the Light; I found that white was opposite to black, red
to blue, yellow to violet, and green to a Compound of red and violet.
That is, those parts of the Glass were black when looked through, which
when looked upon appeared white, and on the contrary. And so those which
in one case exhibited blue, did in the other case exhibit red. And the
like of the other Colours. The manner you have represented in the third
Figure, where AB, CD, are the Surfaces of the Glasses contiguous at E,
and the black Lines between them are their Distances in arithmetical
Progression, and the Colours written above are seen by reflected Light,
and those below by Light transmitted (p. 209).

_Obs._ 10. Wetting the Object-glasses a little at their edges, the Water
crept in slowly between them, and the Circles thereby became less and
the Colours more faint: Insomuch that as the Water crept along, one half
of them at which it first arrived would appear broken off from the other
half, and contracted into a less Room. By measuring them I found the
Proportions of their Diameters to the Diameters of the like Circles made
by Air to be about seven to eight, and consequently the Intervals of the
Glasses at like Circles, caused by those two Mediums Water and Air, are
as about three to four. Perhaps it may be a general Rule, That if any
other Medium more or less dense than Water be compress'd between the
Glasses, their Intervals at the Rings caused thereby will be to their
Intervals caused by interjacent Air, as the Sines are which measure the
Refraction made out of that Medium into Air.

_Obs._ 11. When the Water was between the Glasses, if I pressed the
upper Glass variously at its edges to make the Rings move nimbly from
one place to another, a little white Spot would immediately follow the
center of them, which upon creeping in of the ambient Water into that
place would presently vanish. Its appearance was such as interjacent Air
would have caused, and it exhibited the same Colours. But it was not
air, for where any Bubbles of Air were in the Water they would not
vanish. The Reflexion must have rather been caused by a subtiler Medium,
which could recede through the Glasses at the creeping in of the Water.

_Obs._ 12. These Observations were made in the open Air. But farther to
examine the Effects of colour'd Light falling on the Glasses, I darken'd
the Room, and view'd them by Reflexion of the Colours of a Prism cast on
a Sheet of white Paper, my Eye being so placed that I could see the
colour'd Paper by Reflexion in the Glasses, as in a Looking-glass. And
by this means the Rings became distincter and visible to a far greater
number than in the open Air. I have sometimes seen more than twenty of
them, whereas in the open Air I could not discern above eight or nine.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

_Obs._ 13. Appointing an Assistant to move the Prism to and fro about
its Axis, that all the Colours might successively fall on that part of
the Paper which I saw by Reflexion from that part of the Glasses, where
the Circles appear'd, so that all the Colours might be successively
reflected from the Circles to my Eye, whilst I held it immovable, I
found the Circles which the red Light made to be manifestly bigger than
those which were made by the blue and violet. And it was very pleasant
to see them gradually swell or contract accordingly as the Colour of the
Light was changed. The Interval of the Glasses at any of the Rings when
they were made by the utmost red Light, was to their Interval at the
same Ring when made by the utmost violet, greater than as 3 to 2, and
less than as 13 to 8. By the most of my Observations it was as 14 to 9.
And this Proportion seem'd very nearly the same in all Obliquities of my
Eye; unless when two Prisms were made use of instead of the
Object-glasses. For then at a certain great obliquity of my Eye, the
Rings made by the several Colours seem'd equal, and at a greater
obliquity those made by the violet would be greater than the same Rings
made by the red: the Refraction of the Prism in this case causing the
most refrangible Rays to fall more obliquely on that plate of the Air
than the least refrangible ones. Thus the Experiment succeeded in the
colour'd Light, which was sufficiently strong and copious to make the
Rings sensible. And thence it may be gather'd, that if the most
refrangible and least refrangible Rays had been copious enough to make
the Rings sensible without the mixture of other Rays, the Proportion
which here was 14 to 9 would have been a little greater, suppose 14-1/4
or 14-1/3 to 9.

_Obs._ 14. Whilst the Prism was turn'd about its Axis with an uniform
Motion, to make all the several Colours fall successively upon the
Object-glasses, and thereby to make the Rings contract and dilate: The
Contraction or Dilatation of each Ring thus made by the variation of its
Colour was swiftest in the red, and slowest in the violet, and in the
intermediate Colours it had intermediate degrees of Celerity. Comparing
the quantity of Contraction and Dilatation made by all the degrees of
each Colour, I found that it was greatest in the red; less in the
yellow, still less in the blue, and least in the violet. And to make as
just an Estimation as I could of the Proportions of their Contractions
or Dilatations, I observ'd that the whole Contraction or Dilatation of
the Diameter of any Ring made by all the degrees of red, was to that of
the Diameter of the same Ring made by all the degrees of violet, as
about four to three, or five to four, and that when the Light was of the
middle Colour between yellow and green, the Diameter of the Ring was
very nearly an arithmetical Mean between the greatest Diameter of the
same Ring made by the outmost red, and the least Diameter thereof made
by the outmost violet: Contrary to what happens in the Colours of the
oblong Spectrum made by the Refraction of a Prism, where the red is most
contracted, the violet most expanded, and in the midst of all the
Colours is the Confine of green and blue. And hence I seem to collect
that the thicknesses of the Air between the Glasses there, where the
Ring is successively made by the limits of the five principal Colours
(red, yellow, green, blue, violet) in order (that is, by the extreme
red, by the limit of red and yellow in the middle of the orange, by the
limit of yellow and green, by the limit of green and blue, by the limit
of blue and violet in the middle of the indigo, and by the extreme
violet) are to one another very nearly as the sixth lengths of a Chord
which found the Notes in a sixth Major, _sol_, _la_, _mi_, _fa_, _sol_,
_la_. But it agrees something better with the Observation to say, that
the thicknesses of the Air between the Glasses there, where the Rings
are successively made by the limits of the seven Colours, red, orange,
yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet in order, are to one another as the
Cube Roots of the Squares of the eight lengths of a Chord, which found
the Notes in an eighth, _sol_, _la_, _fa_, _sol_, _la_, _mi_, _fa_,
_sol_; that is, as the Cube Roots of the Squares of the Numbers, 1, 8/9,
5/6, 3/4, 2/3, 3/5, 9/16, 1/2.

_Obs._ 15. These Rings were not of various Colours like those made in
the open Air, but appeared all over of that prismatick Colour only with
which they were illuminated. And by projecting the prismatick Colours
immediately upon the Glasses, I found that the Light which fell on the
dark Spaces which were between the Colour'd Rings was transmitted
through the Glasses without any variation of Colour. For on a white
Paper placed behind, it would paint Rings of the same Colour with those
which were reflected, and of the bigness of their immediate Spaces. And
from thence the origin of these Rings is manifest; namely, that the Air
between the Glasses, according to its various thickness, is disposed in
some places to reflect, and in others to transmit the Light of any one
Colour (as you may see represented in the fourth Figure) and in the same
place to reflect that of one Colour where it transmits that of another.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

_Obs._ 16. The Squares of the Diameters of these Rings made by any
prismatick Colour were in arithmetical Progression, as in the fifth
Observation. And the Diameter of the sixth Circle, when made by the
citrine yellow, and viewed almost perpendicularly was about 58/100 parts
of an Inch, or a little less, agreeable to the sixth Observation.

The precedent Observations were made with a rarer thin Medium,
terminated by a denser, such as was Air or Water compress'd between two
Glasses. In those that follow are set down the Appearances of a denser
Medium thin'd within a rarer, such as are Plates of Muscovy Glass,
Bubbles of Water, and some other thin Substances terminated on all sides
with air.

_Obs._ 17. If a Bubble be blown with Water first made tenacious by
dissolving a little Soap in it, 'tis a common Observation, that after a
while it will appear tinged with a great variety of Colours. To defend
these Bubbles from being agitated by the external Air (whereby their
Colours are irregularly moved one among another, so that no accurate
Observation can be made of them,) as soon as I had blown any of them I
cover'd it with a clear Glass, and by that means its Colours emerged in
a very regular order, like so many concentrick Rings encompassing the
top of the Bubble. And as the Bubble grew thinner by the continual
subsiding of the Water, these Rings dilated slowly and overspread the
whole Bubble, descending in order to the bottom of it, where they
vanish'd successively. In the mean while, after all the Colours were
emerged at the top, there grew in the center of the Rings a small round
black Spot, like that in the first Observation, which continually
dilated it self till it became sometimes more than 1/2 or 3/4 of an Inch
in breadth before the Bubble broke. At first I thought there had been no
Light reflected from the Water in that place, but observing it more
curiously, I saw within it several smaller round Spots, which appeared
much blacker and darker than the rest, whereby I knew that there was
some Reflexion at the other places which were not so dark as those
Spots. And by farther Tryal I found that I could see the Images of some
things (as of a Candle or the Sun) very faintly reflected, not only from
the great black Spot, but also from the little darker Spots which were
within it.

Besides the aforesaid colour'd Rings there would often appear small
Spots of Colours, ascending and descending up and down the sides of the
Bubble, by reason of some Inequalities in the subsiding of the Water.
And sometimes small black Spots generated at the sides would ascend up
to the larger black Spot at the top of the Bubble, and unite with it.

_Obs._ 18. Because the Colours of these Bubbles were more extended and
lively than those of the Air thinn'd between two Glasses, and so more
easy to be distinguish'd, I shall here give you a farther description of
their order, as they were observ'd in viewing them by Reflexion of the
Skies when of a white Colour, whilst a black substance was placed
behind the Bubble. And they were these, red, blue; red, blue; red, blue;
red, green; red, yellow, green, blue, purple; red, yellow, green, blue,
violet; red, yellow, white, blue, black.

The three first Successions of red and blue were very dilute and dirty,
especially the first, where the red seem'd in a manner to be white.
Among these there was scarce any other Colour sensible besides red and
blue, only the blues (and principally the second blue) inclined a little
to green.

The fourth red was also dilute and dirty, but not so much as the former
three; after that succeeded little or no yellow, but a copious green,
which at first inclined a little to yellow, and then became a pretty
brisk and good willow green, and afterwards changed to a bluish Colour;
but there succeeded neither blue nor violet.

The fifth red at first inclined very much to purple, and afterwards
became more bright and brisk, but yet not very pure. This was succeeded
with a very bright and intense yellow, which was but little in quantity,
and soon chang'd to green: But that green was copious and something more
pure, deep and lively, than the former green. After that follow'd an
excellent blue of a bright Sky-colour, and then a purple, which was less
in quantity than the blue, and much inclined to red.

The sixth red was at first of a very fair and lively scarlet, and soon
after of a brighter Colour, being very pure and brisk, and the best of
all the reds. Then after a lively orange follow'd an intense bright and
copious yellow, which was also the best of all the yellows, and this
changed first to a greenish yellow, and then to a greenish blue; but the
green between the yellow and the blue, was very little and dilute,
seeming rather a greenish white than a green. The blue which succeeded
became very good, and of a very bright Sky-colour, but yet something
inferior to the former blue; and the violet was intense and deep with
little or no redness in it. And less in quantity than the blue.

In the last red appeared a tincture of scarlet next to violet, which
soon changed to a brighter Colour, inclining to an orange; and the
yellow which follow'd was at first pretty good and lively, but
afterwards it grew more dilute until by degrees it ended in perfect
whiteness. And this whiteness, if the Water was very tenacious and
well-temper'd, would slowly spread and dilate it self over the greater
part of the Bubble; continually growing paler at the top, where at
length it would crack in many places, and those cracks, as they dilated,
would appear of a pretty good, but yet obscure and dark Sky-colour; the
white between the blue Spots diminishing, until it resembled the Threds
of an irregular Net-work, and soon after vanish'd, and left all the
upper part of the Bubble of the said dark blue Colour. And this Colour,
after the aforesaid manner, dilated it self downwards, until sometimes
it hath overspread the whole Bubble. In the mean while at the top, which
was of a darker blue than the bottom, and appear'd also full of many
round blue Spots, something darker than the rest, there would emerge
one or more very black Spots, and within those, other Spots of an
intenser blackness, which I mention'd in the former Observation; and
these continually dilated themselves until the Bubble broke.

If the Water was not very tenacious, the black Spots would break forth
in the white, without any sensible intervention of the blue. And
sometimes they would break forth within the precedent yellow, or red, or
perhaps within the blue of the second order, before the intermediate
Colours had time to display themselves.

By this description you may perceive how great an affinity these Colours
have with those of Air described in the fourth Observation, although set
down in a contrary order, by reason that they begin to appear when the
Bubble is thickest, and are most conveniently reckon'd from the lowest
and thickest part of the Bubble upwards.

_Obs._ 19. Viewing in several oblique Positions of my Eye the Rings of
Colours emerging on the top of the Bubble, I found that they were
sensibly dilated by increasing the obliquity, but yet not so much by far
as those made by thinn'd Air in the seventh Observation. For there they
were dilated so much as, when view'd most obliquely, to arrive at a part
of the Plate more than twelve times thicker than that where they
appear'd when viewed perpendicularly; whereas in this case the thickness
of the Water, at which they arrived when viewed most obliquely, was to
that thickness which exhibited them by perpendicular Rays, something
less than as 8 to 5. By the best of my Observations it was between 15
and 15-1/2 to 10; an increase about 24 times less than in the other
case.

Sometimes the Bubble would become of an uniform thickness all over,
except at the top of it near the black Spot, as I knew, because it would
exhibit the same appearance of Colours in all Positions of the Eye. And
then the Colours which were seen at its apparent circumference by the
obliquest Rays, would be different from those that were seen in other
places, by Rays less oblique to it. And divers Spectators might see the
same part of it of differing Colours, by viewing it at very differing
Obliquities. Now observing how much the Colours at the same places of
the Bubble, or at divers places of equal thickness, were varied by the
several Obliquities of the Rays; by the assistance of the 4th, 14th,
16th and 18th Observations, as they are hereafter explain'd, I collect
the thickness of the Water requisite to exhibit any one and the same
Colour, at several Obliquities, to be very nearly in the Proportion
expressed in this Table.

-----------------+------------------+----------------
  Incidence on   | Refraction into  | Thickness of
   the Water.    |    the Water.    |   the Water.
-----------------+------------------+----------------
   Deg.    Min.  |    Deg.    Min.  |
                 |                  |
    00     00    |     00     00    |    10
                 |                  |
    15     00    |     11     11    |    10-1/4
                 |                  |
    30     00    |     22      1    |    10-4/5
                 |                  |
    45     00    |     32      2    |    11-4/5
                 |                  |
    60     00    |     40     30    |    13
                 |                  |
    75     00    |     46     25    |    14-1/2
                 |                  |
    90     00    |     48     35    |    15-1/5
-----------------+------------------+----------------

In the two first Columns are express'd the Obliquities of the Rays to
the Superficies of the Water, that is, their Angles of Incidence and
Refraction. Where I suppose, that the Sines which measure them are in
round Numbers, as 3 to 4, though probably the Dissolution of Soap in the
Water, may a little alter its refractive Virtue. In the third Column,
the Thickness of the Bubble, at which any one Colour is exhibited in
those several Obliquities, is express'd in Parts, of which ten
constitute its Thickness when the Rays are perpendicular. And the Rule
found by the seventh Observation agrees well with these Measures, if
duly apply'd; namely, that the Thickness of a Plate of Water requisite
to exhibit one and the same Colour at several Obliquities of the Eye, is
proportional to the Secant of an Angle, whose Sine is the first of an
hundred and six arithmetical mean Proportionals between the Sines of
Incidence and Refraction counted from the lesser Sine, that is, from the
Sine of Refraction when the Refraction is made out of Air into Water,
otherwise from the Sine of Incidence.

I have sometimes observ'd, that the Colours which arise on polish'd
Steel by heating it, or on Bell-metal, and some other metalline
Substances, when melted and pour'd on the Ground, where they may cool in
the open Air, have, like the Colours of Water-bubbles, been a little
changed by viewing them at divers Obliquities, and particularly that a
deep blue, or violet, when view'd very obliquely, hath been changed to a
deep red. But the Changes of these Colours are not so great and
sensible as of those made by Water. For the Scoria, or vitrified Part of
the Metal, which most Metals when heated or melted do continually
protrude, and send out to their Surface, and which by covering the
Metals in form of a thin glassy Skin, causes these Colours, is much
denser than Water; and I find that the Change made by the Obliquation of
the Eye is least in Colours of the densest thin Substances.

_Obs._ 20. As in the ninth Observation, so here, the Bubble, by
transmitted Light, appear'd of a contrary Colour to that, which it
exhibited by Reflexion. Thus when the Bubble being look'd on by the
Light of the Clouds reflected from it, seemed red at its apparent
Circumference, if the Clouds at the same time, or immediately after,
were view'd through it, the Colour at its Circumference would be blue.
And, on the contrary, when by reflected Light it appeared blue, it would
appear red by transmitted Light.

_Obs._ 21. By wetting very thin Plates of _Muscovy_ Glass, whose
thinness made the like Colours appear, the Colours became more faint and
languid, especially by wetting the Plates on that side opposite to the
Eye: But I could not perceive any variation of their Species. So then
the thickness of a Plate requisite to produce any Colour, depends only
on the density of the Plate, and not on that of the ambient Medium. And
hence, by the 10th and 16th Observations, may be known the thickness
which Bubbles of Water, or Plates of _Muscovy_ Glass, or other
Substances, have at any Colour produced by them.

_Obs._ 22. A thin transparent Body, which is denser than its ambient
Medium, exhibits more brisk and vivid Colours than that which is so much
rarer; as I have particularly observed in the Air and Glass. For blowing
Glass very thin at a Lamp Furnace, those Plates encompassed with Air did
exhibit Colours much more vivid than those of Air made thin between two
Glasses.

_Obs._ 23. Comparing the quantity of Light reflected from the several
Rings, I found that it was most copious from the first or inmost, and in
the exterior Rings became gradually less and less. Also the whiteness of
the first Ring was stronger than that reflected from those parts of the
thin Medium or Plate which were without the Rings; as I could manifestly
perceive by viewing at a distance the Rings made by the two
Object-glasses; or by comparing two Bubbles of Water blown at distant
Times, in the first of which the Whiteness appear'd, which succeeded all
the Colours, and in the other, the Whiteness which preceded them all.

_Obs._ 24. When the two Object-glasses were lay'd upon one another, so
as to make the Rings of the Colours appear, though with my naked Eye I
could not discern above eight or nine of those Rings, yet by viewing
them through a Prism I have seen a far greater Multitude, insomuch that
I could number more than forty, besides many others, that were so very
small and close together, that I could not keep my Eye steady on them
severally so as to number them, but by their Extent I have sometimes
estimated them to be more than an hundred. And I believe the Experiment
may be improved to the Discovery of far greater Numbers. For they seem
to be really unlimited, though visible only so far as they can be
separated by the Refraction of the Prism, as I shall hereafter explain.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

But it was but one side of these Rings, namely, that towards which the
Refraction was made, which by that Refraction was render'd distinct, and
the other side became more confused than when view'd by the naked Eye,
insomuch that there I could not discern above one or two, and sometimes
none of those Rings, of which I could discern eight or nine with my
naked Eye. And their Segments or Arcs, which on the other side appear'd
so numerous, for the most part exceeded not the third Part of a Circle.
If the Refraction was very great, or the Prism very distant from the
Object-glasses, the middle Part of those Arcs became also confused, so
as to disappear and constitute an even Whiteness, whilst on either side
their Ends, as also the whole Arcs farthest from the Center, became
distincter than before, appearing in the Form as you see them design'd
in the fifth Figure.

The Arcs, where they seem'd distinctest, were only white and black
successively, without any other Colours intermix'd. But in other Places
there appeared Colours, whose Order was inverted by the refraction in
such manner, that if I first held the Prism very near the
Object-glasses, and then gradually removed it farther off towards my
Eye, the Colours of the 2d, 3d, 4th, and following Rings, shrunk towards
the white that emerged between them, until they wholly vanish'd into it
at the middle of the Arcs, and afterwards emerged again in a contrary
Order. But at the Ends of the Arcs they retain'd their Order unchanged.

I have sometimes so lay'd one Object-glass upon the other, that to the
naked Eye they have all over seem'd uniformly white, without the least
Appearance of any of the colour'd Rings; and yet by viewing them through
a Prism, great Multitudes of those Rings have discover'd themselves. And
in like manner Plates of _Muscovy_ Glass, and Bubbles of Glass blown at
a Lamp-Furnace, which were not so thin as to exhibit any Colours to the
naked Eye, have through the Prism exhibited a great Variety of them
ranged irregularly up and down in the Form of Waves. And so Bubbles of
Water, before they began to exhibit their Colours to the naked Eye of a
Bystander, have appeared through a Prism, girded about with many
parallel and horizontal Rings; to produce which Effect, it was necessary
to hold the Prism parallel, or very nearly parallel to the Horizon, and
to dispose it so that the Rays might be refracted upwards.




THE

SECOND BOOK

OF

OPTICKS


_PART II._

_Remarks upon the foregoing Observations._


Having given my Observations of these Colours, before I make use of them
to unfold the Causes of the Colours of natural Bodies, it is convenient
that by the simplest of them, such as are the 2d, 3d, 4th, 9th, 12th,
18th, 20th, and 24th, I first explain the more compounded. And first to
shew how the Colours in the fourth and eighteenth Observations are
produced, let there be taken in any Right Line from the Point Y, [in
_Fig._ 6.] the Lengths YA, YB, YC, YD, YE, YF, YG, YH, in proportion to
one another, as the Cube-Roots of the Squares of the Numbers, 1/2, 9/16,
3/5, 2/3, 3/4, 5/6, 8/9, 1, whereby the Lengths of a Musical Chord to
sound all the Notes in an eighth are represented; that is, in the
Proportion of the Numbers 6300, 6814, 7114, 7631, 8255, 8855, 9243,
10000. And at the Points A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, let Perpendiculars
A[Greek: a], B[Greek: b], &c. be erected, by whose Intervals the Extent
of the several Colours set underneath against them, is to be
represented. Then divide the Line _A[Greek: a]_ in such Proportion as
the Numbers 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, &c. set at the Points of
Division denote. And through those Divisions from Y draw Lines 1I, 2K,
3L, 5M, 6N, 7O, &c.

Now, if A2 be supposed to represent the Thickness of any thin
transparent Body, at which the outmost Violet is most copiously
reflected in the first Ring, or Series of Colours, then by the 13th
Observation, HK will represent its Thickness, at which the utmost Red is
most copiously reflected in the same Series. Also by the 5th and 16th
Observations, A6 and HN will denote the Thicknesses at which those
extreme Colours are most copiously reflected in the second Series, and
A10 and HQ the Thicknesses at which they are most copiously reflected in
the third Series, and so on. And the Thickness at which any of the
intermediate Colours are reflected most copiously, will, according to
the 14th Observation, be defined by the distance of the Line AH from the
intermediate parts of the Lines 2K, 6N, 10Q, &c. against which the Names
of those Colours are written below.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

But farther, to define the Latitude of these Colours in each Ring or
Series, let A1 design the least thickness, and A3 the greatest
thickness, at which the extreme violet in the first Series is reflected,
and let HI, and HL, design the like limits for the extreme red, and let
the intermediate Colours be limited by the intermediate parts of the
Lines 1I, and 3L, against which the Names of those Colours are written,
and so on: But yet with this caution, that the Reflexions be supposed
strongest at the intermediate Spaces, 2K, 6N, 10Q, &c. and from thence
to decrease gradually towards these limits, 1I, 3L, 5M, 7O, &c. on
either side; where you must not conceive them to be precisely limited,
but to decay indefinitely. And whereas I have assign'd the same Latitude
to every Series, I did it, because although the Colours in the first
Series seem to be a little broader than the rest, by reason of a
stronger Reflexion there, yet that inequality is so insensible as
scarcely to be determin'd by Observation.

Now according to this Description, conceiving that the Rays originally
of several Colours are by turns reflected at the Spaces 1I, L3, 5M, O7,
9PR11, &c. and transmitted at the Spaces AHI1, 3LM5, 7OP9, &c. it is
easy to know what Colour must in the open Air be exhibited at any
thickness of a transparent thin Body. For if a Ruler be applied parallel
to AH, at that distance from it by which the thickness of the Body is
represented, the alternate Spaces 1IL3, 5MO7, &c. which it crosseth will
denote the reflected original Colours, of which the Colour exhibited in
the open Air is compounded. Thus if the constitution of the green in the
third Series of Colours be desired, apply the Ruler as you see at
[Greek: prsph], and by its passing through some of the blue at [Greek:
p] and yellow at [Greek: s], as well as through the green at [Greek: r],
you may conclude that the green exhibited at that thickness of the Body
is principally constituted of original green, but not without a mixture
of some blue and yellow.

By this means you may know how the Colours from the center of the Rings
outward ought to succeed in order as they were described in the 4th and
18th Observations. For if you move the Ruler gradually from AH through
all distances, having pass'd over the first Space which denotes little
or no Reflexion to be made by thinnest Substances, it will first arrive
at 1 the violet, and then very quickly at the blue and green, which
together with that violet compound blue, and then at the yellow and red,
by whose farther addition that blue is converted into whiteness, which
whiteness continues during the transit of the edge of the Ruler from I
to 3, and after that by the successive deficience of its component
Colours, turns first to compound yellow, and then to red, and last of
all the red ceaseth at L. Then begin the Colours of the second Series,
which succeed in order during the transit of the edge of the Ruler from
5 to O, and are more lively than before, because more expanded and
severed. And for the same reason instead of the former white there
intercedes between the blue and yellow a mixture of orange, yellow,
green, blue and indigo, all which together ought to exhibit a dilute and
imperfect green. So the Colours of the third Series all succeed in
order; first, the violet, which a little interferes with the red of the
second order, and is thereby inclined to a reddish purple; then the blue
and green, which are less mix'd with other Colours, and consequently
more lively than before, especially the green: Then follows the yellow,
some of which towards the green is distinct and good, but that part of
it towards the succeeding red, as also that red is mix'd with the violet
and blue of the fourth Series, whereby various degrees of red very much
inclining to purple are compounded. This violet and blue, which should
succeed this red, being mixed with, and hidden in it, there succeeds a
green. And this at first is much inclined to blue, but soon becomes a
good green, the only unmix'd and lively Colour in this fourth Series.
For as it verges towards the yellow, it begins to interfere with the
Colours of the fifth Series, by whose mixture the succeeding yellow and
red are very much diluted and made dirty, especially the yellow, which
being the weaker Colour is scarce able to shew it self. After this the
several Series interfere more and more, and their Colours become more
and more intermix'd, till after three or four more revolutions (in which
the red and blue predominate by turns) all sorts of Colours are in all
places pretty equally blended, and compound an even whiteness.

And since by the 15th Observation the Rays endued with one Colour are
transmitted, where those of another Colour are reflected, the reason of
the Colours made by the transmitted Light in the 9th and 20th
Observations is from hence evident.

If not only the Order and Species of these Colours, but also the precise
thickness of the Plate, or thin Body at which they are exhibited, be
desired in parts of an Inch, that may be also obtained by assistance of
the 6th or 16th Observations. For according to those Observations the
thickness of the thinned Air, which between two Glasses exhibited the
most luminous parts of the first six Rings were 1/178000, 3/178000,
5/178000, 7/178000, 9/178000, 11/178000 parts of an Inch. Suppose the
Light reflected most copiously at these thicknesses be the bright
citrine yellow, or confine of yellow and orange, and these thicknesses
will be F[Greek: l], F[Greek: m], F[Greek: u], F[Greek: x], F[Greek: o],
F[Greek: t]. And this being known, it is easy to determine what
thickness of Air is represented by G[Greek: ph], or by any other
distance of the Ruler from AH.

But farther, since by the 10th Observation the thickness of Air was to
the thickness of Water, which between the same Glasses exhibited the
same Colour, as 4 to 3, and by the 21st Observation the Colours of thin
Bodies are not varied by varying the ambient Medium; the thickness of a
Bubble of Water, exhibiting any Colour, will be 3/4 of the thickness of
Air producing the same Colour. And so according to the same 10th and
21st Observations, the thickness of a Plate of Glass, whose Refraction
of the mean refrangible Ray, is measured by the proportion of the Sines
31 to 20, may be 20/31 of the thickness of Air producing the same
Colours; and the like of other Mediums. I do not affirm, that this
proportion of 20 to 31, holds in all the Rays; for the Sines of other
sorts of Rays have other Proportions. But the differences of those
Proportions are so little that I do not here consider them. On these
Grounds I have composed the following Table, wherein the thickness of
Air, Water, and Glass, at which each Colour is most intense and
specifick, is expressed in parts of an Inch divided into ten hundred
thousand equal parts.

Now if this Table be compared with the 6th Scheme, you will there see
the constitution of each Colour, as to its Ingredients, or the original
Colours of which it is compounded, and thence be enabled to judge of its
Intenseness or Imperfection; which may suffice in explication of the 4th
and 18th Observations, unless it be farther desired to delineate the
manner how the Colours appear, when the two Object-glasses are laid upon
one another. To do which, let there be described a large Arc of a
Circle, and a streight Line which may touch that Arc, and parallel to
that Tangent several occult Lines, at such distances from it, as the
Numbers set against the several Colours in the Table denote. For the
Arc, and its Tangent, will represent the Superficies of the Glasses
terminating the interjacent Air; and the places where the occult Lines
cut the Arc will show at what distances from the center, or Point of
contact, each Colour is reflected.

_The thickness of colour'd Plates and Particles of_
                                          _____________|_______________
                                         /                             \
                                            Air.      Water.     Glass.
                                        |---------+----------+----------+
                       {Very black      |    1/2  |    3/8   |  10/31   |
                       {Black           |  1      |    3/4   |  20/31   |
                       {Beginning of    |         |          |          |
                       {  Black         |  2      |  1-1/2   |  1-2/7   |
Their Colours of the   {Blue            |  2-2/5  |  1-4/5   |  1-11/22 |
first Order,           {White           |  5-1/4  |  3-7/8   |  3-2/5   |
                       {Yellow          |  7-1/9  |  5-1/3   |  4-3/5   |
                       {Orange          |  8      |  6       |  5-1/6   |
                       {Red             |  9      |  6-3/4   |  5-4/5   |
                                        |---------+----------+----------|
                       {Violet          | 11-1/6  |  8-3/8   |  7-1/5   |
                       {Indigo          | 12-5/6  |  9-5/8   |  8-2/11  |
                       {Blue            | 14      |  10-1/2  |  9       |
                       {Green           | 15-1/8  | 11-2/3   |  9-5/7   |
Of the second order,   {Yellow          | 16-2/7  | 12-1/5   | 10-2/5   |
                       {Orange          | 17-2/9  | 13       | 11-1/9   |
                       {Bright red      | 18-1/3  | 13-3/4   | 11-5/6   |
                       {Scarlet         | 19-2/3  | 14-3/4   | 12-2/3   |
                                        |---------+----------+----------|
                       {Purple          | 21      | 15-3/4   | 13-11/20 |
                       {Indigo          | 22-1/10 | 16-4/7   | 14-1/4   |
                       {Blue            | 23-2/5  | 17-11/20 | 15-1/10  |
Of the third Order,    {Green           | 25-1/5  | 18-9/10  | 16-1/4   |
                       {Yellow          | 27-1/7  | 20-1/3   | 17-1/2   |
                       {Red             | 29      | 21-3/4   | 18-5/7   |
                       {Bluish red      | 32      | 24       | 20-2/3   |
                                        |---------+----------+----------|
                       {Bluish green    | 34      | 25-1/2   | 22       |
                       {Green           | 35-2/7  | 26-1/2   | 22-3/4   |
Of the fourth Order,   {Yellowish green | 36      | 27       | 23-2/9   |
                       {Red             | 40-1/3  | 30-1/4   | 26       |
                                        |---------+----------+----------|
                       {Greenish blue   | 46      | 34-1/2   | 29-2/3   |
Of the fifth Order,    {Red             | 52-1/2  | 39-3/8   | 34       |
                                        |---------+----------+----------|
                       {Greenish blue   | 58-3/4  | 44       | 38       |
Of the sixth Order,    {Red             | 65      | 48-3/4   | 42       |
                                        |---------+----------+----------|
Of the seventh Order,  {Greenish blue   | 71      | 53-1/4   | 45-4/5   |
                       {Ruddy White     | 77      | 57-3/4   | 49-2/3   |
                                        |---------+----------+----------|

There are also other Uses of this Table: For by its assistance the
thickness of the Bubble in the 19th Observation was determin'd by the
Colours which it exhibited. And so the bigness of the parts of natural
Bodies may be conjectured by their Colours, as shall be hereafter shewn.
Also, if two or more very thin Plates be laid one upon another, so as to
compose one Plate equalling them all in thickness, the resulting Colour
may be hereby determin'd. For instance, Mr. _Hook_ observed, as is
mentioned in his _Micrographia_, that a faint yellow Plate of _Muscovy_
Glass laid upon a blue one, constituted a very deep purple. The yellow
of the first Order is a faint one, and the thickness of the Plate
exhibiting it, according to the Table is 4-3/5, to which add 9, the
thickness exhibiting blue of the second Order, and the Sum will be
13-3/5, which is the thickness exhibiting the purple of the third Order.

To explain, in the next place, the circumstances of the 2d and 3d
Observations; that is, how the Rings of the Colours may (by turning the
Prisms about their common Axis the contrary way to that expressed in
those Observations) be converted into white and black Rings, and
afterwards into Rings of Colours again, the Colours of each Ring lying
now in an inverted order; it must be remember'd, that those Rings of
Colours are dilated by the obliquation of the Rays to the Air which
intercedes the Glasses, and that according to the Table in the 7th
Observation, their Dilatation or Increase of their Diameter is most
manifest and speedy when they are obliquest. Now the Rays of yellow
being more refracted by the first Superficies of the said Air than those
of red, are thereby made more oblique to the second Superficies, at
which they are reflected to produce the colour'd Rings, and consequently
the yellow Circle in each Ring will be more dilated than the red; and
the Excess of its Dilatation will be so much the greater, by how much
the greater is the obliquity of the Rays, until at last it become of
equal extent with the red of the same Ring. And for the same reason the
green, blue and violet, will be also so much dilated by the still
greater obliquity of their Rays, as to become all very nearly of equal
extent with the red, that is, equally distant from the center of the
Rings. And then all the Colours of the same Ring must be co-incident,
and by their mixture exhibit a white Ring. And these white Rings must
have black and dark Rings between them, because they do not spread and
interfere with one another, as before. And for that reason also they
must become distincter, and visible to far greater numbers. But yet the
violet being obliquest will be something more dilated, in proportion to
its extent, than the other Colours, and so very apt to appear at the
exterior Verges of the white.

Afterwards, by a greater obliquity of the Rays, the violet and blue
become more sensibly dilated than the red and yellow, and so being
farther removed from the center of the Rings, the Colours must emerge
out of the white in an order contrary to that which they had before; the
violet and blue at the exterior Limbs of each Ring, and the red and
yellow at the interior. And the violet, by reason of the greatest
obliquity of its Rays, being in proportion most of all expanded, will
soonest appear at the exterior Limb of each white Ring, and become more
conspicuous than the rest. And the several Series of Colours belonging
to the several Rings, will, by their unfolding and spreading, begin
again to interfere, and thereby render the Rings less distinct, and not
visible to so great numbers.

If instead of the Prisms the Object-glasses be made use of, the Rings
which they exhibit become not white and distinct by the obliquity of the
Eye, by reason that the Rays in their passage through that Air which
intercedes the Glasses are very nearly parallel to those Lines in which
they were first incident on the Glasses, and consequently the Rays
endued with several Colours are not inclined one more than another to
that Air, as it happens in the Prisms.

There is yet another circumstance of these Experiments to be consider'd,
and that is why the black and white Rings which when view'd at a
distance appear distinct, should not only become confused by viewing
them near at hand, but also yield a violet Colour at both the edges of
every white Ring. And the reason is, that the Rays which enter the Eye
at several parts of the Pupil, have several Obliquities to the Glasses,
and those which are most oblique, if consider'd apart, would represent
the Rings bigger than those which are the least oblique. Whence the
breadth of the Perimeter of every white Ring is expanded outwards by the
obliquest Rays, and inwards by the least oblique. And this Expansion is
so much the greater by how much the greater is the difference of the
Obliquity; that is, by how much the Pupil is wider, or the Eye nearer to
the Glasses. And the breadth of the violet must be most expanded,
because the Rays apt to excite a Sensation of that Colour are most
oblique to a second or farther Superficies of the thinn'd Air at which
they are reflected, and have also the greatest variation of Obliquity,
which makes that Colour soonest emerge out of the edges of the white.
And as the breadth of every Ring is thus augmented, the dark Intervals
must be diminish'd, until the neighbouring Rings become continuous, and
are blended, the exterior first, and then those nearer the center; so
that they can no longer be distinguish'd apart, but seem to constitute
an even and uniform whiteness.

Among all the Observations there is none accompanied with so odd
circumstances as the twenty-fourth. Of those the principal are, that in
thin Plates, which to the naked Eye seem of an even and uniform
transparent whiteness, without any terminations of Shadows, the
Refraction of a Prism should make Rings of Colours appear, whereas it
usually makes Objects appear colour'd only there where they are
terminated with Shadows, or have parts unequally luminous; and that it
should make those Rings exceedingly distinct and white, although it
usually renders Objects confused and coloured. The Cause of these things
you will understand by considering, that all the Rings of Colours are
really in the Plate, when view'd with the naked Eye, although by reason
of the great breadth of their Circumferences they so much interfere and
are blended together, that they seem to constitute an uniform whiteness.
But when the Rays pass through the Prism to the Eye, the Orbits of the
several Colours in every Ring are refracted, some more than others,
according to their degrees of Refrangibility: By which means the Colours
on one side of the Ring (that is in the circumference on one side of its
center), become more unfolded and dilated, and those on the other side
more complicated and contracted. And where by a due Refraction they are
so much contracted, that the several Rings become narrower than to
interfere with one another, they must appear distinct, and also white,
if the constituent Colours be so much contracted as to be wholly
co-incident. But on the other side, where the Orbit of every Ring is
made broader by the farther unfolding of its Colours, it must interfere
more with other Rings than before, and so become less distinct.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

To explain this a little farther, suppose the concentrick Circles AV,
and BX, [in _Fig._ 7.] represent the red and violet of any Order, which,
together with the intermediate Colours, constitute any one of these
Rings. Now these being view'd through a Prism, the violet Circle BX,
will, by a greater Refraction, be farther translated from its place than
the red AV, and so approach nearer to it on that side of the Circles,
towards which the Refractions are made. For instance, if the red be
translated to _av_, the violet may be translated to _bx_, so as to
approach nearer to it at _x_ than before; and if the red be farther
translated to av, the violet may be so much farther translated to bx as
to convene with it at x; and if the red be yet farther translated to
[Greek: aY], the violet may be still so much farther translated to
[Greek: bx] as to pass beyond it at [Greek: x], and convene with it at
_e_ and _f_. And this being understood not only of the red and violet,
but of all the other intermediate Colours, and also of every revolution
of those Colours, you will easily perceive how those of the same
revolution or order, by their nearness at _xv_ and [Greek: Yx], and
their coincidence at xv, _e_ and _f_, ought to constitute pretty
distinct Arcs of Circles, especially at xv, or at _e_ and _f_; and that
they will appear severally at _x_[Greek: u] and at xv exhibit whiteness
by their coincidence, and again appear severally at [Greek: Yx], but yet
in a contrary order to that which they had before, and still retain
beyond _e_ and _f_. But on the other side, at _ab_, ab, or [Greek: ab],
these Colours must become much more confused by being dilated and spread
so as to interfere with those of other Orders. And the same confusion
will happen at [Greek: Ux] between _e_ and _f_, if the Refraction be
very great, or the Prism very distant from the Object-glasses: In which
case no parts of the Rings will be seen, save only two little Arcs at
_e_ and _f_, whose distance from one another will be augmented by
removing the Prism still farther from the Object-glasses: And these
little Arcs must be distinctest and whitest at their middle, and at
their ends, where they begin to grow confused, they must be colour'd.
And the Colours at one end of every Arc must be in a contrary order to
those at the other end, by reason that they cross in the intermediate
white; namely, their ends, which verge towards [Greek: Ux], will be red
and yellow on that side next the center, and blue and violet on the
other side. But their other ends which verge from [Greek: Ux], will on
the contrary be blue and violet on that side towards the center, and on
the other side red and yellow.

Now as all these things follow from the properties of Light by a
mathematical way of reasoning, so the truth of them may be manifested by
Experiments. For in a dark Room, by viewing these Rings through a Prism,
by reflexion of the several prismatick Colours, which an assistant
causes to move to and fro upon a Wall or Paper from whence they are
reflected, whilst the Spectator's Eye, the Prism, and the
Object-glasses, (as in the 13th Observation,) are placed steady; the
Position of the Circles made successively by the several Colours, will
be found such, in respect of one another, as I have described in the
Figures _abxv_, or abxv, or _[Greek: abxU]_. And by the same method the
truth of the Explications of other Observations may be examined.

By what hath been said, the like Phænomena of Water and thin Plates of
Glass may be understood. But in small fragments of those Plates there is
this farther observable, that where they lie flat upon a Table, and are
turned about their centers whilst they are view'd through a Prism, they
will in some postures exhibit Waves of various Colours; and some of them
exhibit these Waves in one or two Positions only, but the most of them
do in all Positions exhibit them, and make them for the most part appear
almost all over the Plates. The reason is, that the Superficies of such
Plates are not even, but have many Cavities and Swellings, which, how
shallow soever, do a little vary the thickness of the Plate. For at the
several sides of those Cavities, for the Reasons newly described, there
ought to be produced Waves in several postures of the Prism. Now though
it be but some very small and narrower parts of the Glass, by which
these Waves for the most part are caused, yet they may seem to extend
themselves over the whole Glass, because from the narrowest of those
parts there are Colours of several Orders, that is, of several Rings,
confusedly reflected, which by Refraction of the Prism are unfolded,
separated, and, according to their degrees of Refraction, dispersed to
several places, so as to constitute so many several Waves, as there were
divers orders of Colours promiscuously reflected from that part of the
Glass.

These are the principal Phænomena of thin Plates or Bubbles, whose
Explications depend on the properties of Light, which I have heretofore
deliver'd. And these you see do necessarily follow from them, and agree
with them, even to their very least circumstances; and not only so, but
do very much tend to their proof. Thus, by the 24th Observation it
appears, that the Rays of several Colours, made as well by thin Plates
or Bubbles, as by Refractions of a Prism, have several degrees of
Refrangibility; whereby those of each order, which at the reflexion from
the Plate or Bubble are intermix'd with those of other orders, are
separated from them by Refraction, and associated together so as to
become visible by themselves like Arcs of Circles. For if the Rays were
all alike refrangible, 'tis impossible that the whiteness, which to the
naked Sense appears uniform, should by Refraction have its parts
transposed and ranged into those black and white Arcs.

It appears also that the unequal Refractions of difform Rays proceed not
from any contingent irregularities; such as are Veins, an uneven Polish,
or fortuitous Position of the Pores of Glass; unequal and casual Motions
in the Air or Æther, the spreading, breaking, or dividing the same Ray
into many diverging parts; or the like. For, admitting any such
irregularities, it would be impossible for Refractions to render those
Rings so very distinct, and well defined, as they do in the 24th
Observation. It is necessary therefore that every Ray have its proper
and constant degree of Refrangibility connate with it, according to
which its refraction is ever justly and regularly perform'd; and that
several Rays have several of those degrees.

And what is said of their Refrangibility may be also understood of their
Reflexibility, that is, of their Dispositions to be reflected, some at a
greater, and others at a less thickness of thin Plates or Bubbles;
namely, that those Dispositions are also connate with the Rays, and
immutable; as may appear by the 13th, 14th, and 15th Observations,
compared with the fourth and eighteenth.

By the Precedent Observations it appears also, that whiteness is a
dissimilar mixture of all Colours, and that Light is a mixture of Rays
endued with all those Colours. For, considering the multitude of the
Rings of Colours in the 3d, 12th, and 24th Observations, it is manifest,
that although in the 4th and 18th Observations there appear no more than
eight or nine of those Rings, yet there are really a far greater number,
which so much interfere and mingle with one another, as after those
eight or nine revolutions to dilute one another wholly, and constitute
an even and sensibly uniform whiteness. And consequently that whiteness
must be allow'd a mixture of all Colours, and the Light which conveys it
to the Eye must be a mixture of Rays endued with all those Colours.

But farther; by the 24th Observation it appears, that there is a
constant relation between Colours and Refrangibility; the most
refrangible Rays being violet, the least refrangible red, and those of
intermediate Colours having proportionably intermediate degrees of
Refrangibility. And by the 13th, 14th, and 15th Observations, compared
with the 4th or 18th there appears to be the same constant relation
between Colour and Reflexibility; the violet being in like circumstances
reflected at least thicknesses of any thin Plate or Bubble, the red at
greatest thicknesses, and the intermediate Colours at intermediate
thicknesses. Whence it follows, that the colorifick Dispositions of
Rays are also connate with them, and immutable; and by consequence, that
all the Productions and Appearances of Colours in the World are derived,
not from any physical Change caused in Light by Refraction or Reflexion,
but only from the various Mixtures or Separations of Rays, by virtue of
their different Refrangibility or Reflexibility. And in this respect the
Science of Colours becomes a Speculation as truly mathematical as any
other part of Opticks. I mean, so far as they depend on the Nature of
Light, and are not produced or alter'd by the Power of Imagination, or
by striking or pressing the Eye.




THE

SECOND BOOK

OF

OPTICKS


_PART III._

_Of the permanent Colours of natural Bodies, and the Analogy between
them and the Colours of thin transparent Plates._

I am now come to another part of this Design, which is to consider how
the Phænomena of thin transparent Plates stand related to those of all
other natural Bodies. Of these Bodies I have already told you that they
appear of divers Colours, accordingly as they are disposed to reflect
most copiously the Rays originally endued with those Colours. But their
Constitutions, whereby they reflect some Rays more copiously than
others, remain to be discover'd; and these I shall endeavour to manifest
in the following Propositions.


PROP. I.

_Those Superficies of transparent Bodies reflect the greatest quantity
of Light, which have the greatest refracting Power; that is, which
intercede Mediums that differ most in their refractive Densities. And in
the Confines of equally refracting Mediums there is no Reflexion._

The Analogy between Reflexion and Refraction will appear by considering,
that when Light passeth obliquely out of one Medium into another which
refracts from the perpendicular, the greater is the difference of their
refractive Density, the less Obliquity of Incidence is requisite to
cause a total Reflexion. For as the Sines are which measure the
Refraction, so is the Sine of Incidence at which the total Reflexion
begins, to the Radius of the Circle; and consequently that Angle of
Incidence is least where there is the greatest difference of the Sines.
Thus in the passing of Light out of Water into Air, where the Refraction
is measured by the Ratio of the Sines 3 to 4, the total Reflexion begins
when the Angle of Incidence is about 48 Degrees 35 Minutes. In passing
out of Glass into Air, where the Refraction is measured by the Ratio of
the Sines 20 to 31, the total Reflexion begins when the Angle of
Incidence is 40 Degrees 10 Minutes; and so in passing out of Crystal, or
more strongly refracting Mediums into Air, there is still a less
obliquity requisite to cause a total reflexion. Superficies therefore
which refract most do soonest reflect all the Light which is incident on
them, and so must be allowed most strongly reflexive.

But the truth of this Proposition will farther appear by observing, that
in the Superficies interceding two transparent Mediums, (such as are
Air, Water, Oil, common Glass, Crystal, metalline Glasses, Island
Glasses, white transparent Arsenick, Diamonds, &c.) the Reflexion is
stronger or weaker accordingly, as the Superficies hath a greater or
less refracting Power. For in the Confine of Air and Sal-gem 'tis
stronger than in the Confine of Air and Water, and still stronger in the
Confine of Air and common Glass or Crystal, and stronger in the Confine
of Air and a Diamond. If any of these, and such like transparent Solids,
be immerged in Water, its Reflexion becomes, much weaker than before;
and still weaker if they be immerged in the more strongly refracting
Liquors of well rectified Oil of Vitriol or Spirit of Turpentine. If
Water be distinguish'd into two parts by any imaginary Surface, the
Reflexion in the Confine of those two parts is none at all. In the
Confine of Water and Ice 'tis very little; in that of Water and Oil 'tis
something greater; in that of Water and Sal-gem still greater; and in
that of Water and Glass, or Crystal or other denser Substances still
greater, accordingly as those Mediums differ more or less in their
refracting Powers. Hence in the Confine of common Glass and Crystal,
there ought to be a weak Reflexion, and a stronger Reflexion in the
Confine of common and metalline Glass; though I have not yet tried
this. But in the Confine of two Glasses of equal density, there is not
any sensible Reflexion; as was shewn in the first Observation. And the
same may be understood of the Superficies interceding two Crystals, or
two Liquors, or any other Substances in which no Refraction is caused.
So then the reason why uniform pellucid Mediums (such as Water, Glass,
or Crystal,) have no sensible Reflexion but in their external
Superficies, where they are adjacent to other Mediums of a different
density, is because all their contiguous parts have one and the same
degree of density.


PROP. II.

_The least parts of almost all natural Bodies are in some measure
transparent: And the Opacity of those Bodies ariseth from the multitude
of Reflexions caused in their internal Parts._

That this is so has been observed by others, and will easily be granted
by them that have been conversant with Microscopes. And it may be also
tried by applying any substance to a hole through which some Light is
immitted into a dark Room. For how opake soever that Substance may seem
in the open Air, it will by that means appear very manifestly
transparent, if it be of a sufficient thinness. Only white metalline
Bodies must be excepted, which by reason of their excessive density seem
to reflect almost all the Light incident on their first Superficies;
unless by solution in Menstruums they be reduced into very small
Particles, and then they become transparent.


PROP. III.

_Between the parts of opake and colour'd Bodies are many Spaces, either
empty, or replenish'd with Mediums of other Densities; as Water between
the tinging Corpuscles wherewith any Liquor is impregnated, Air between
the aqueous Globules that constitute Clouds or Mists; and for the most
part Spaces void of both Air and Water, but yet perhaps not wholly void
of all Substance, between the parts of hard Bodies._

The truth of this is evinced by the two precedent Propositions: For by
the second Proposition there are many Reflexions made by the internal
parts of Bodies, which, by the first Proposition, would not happen if
the parts of those Bodies were continued without any such Interstices
between them; because Reflexions are caused only in Superficies, which
intercede Mediums of a differing density, by _Prop._ 1.

But farther, that this discontinuity of parts is the principal Cause of
the opacity of Bodies, will appear by considering, that opake Substances
become transparent by filling their Pores with any Substance of equal or
almost equal density with their parts. Thus Paper dipped in Water or
Oil, the _Oculus Mundi_ Stone steep'd in Water, Linnen Cloth oiled or
varnish'd, and many other Substances soaked in such Liquors as will
intimately pervade their little Pores, become by that means more
transparent than otherwise; so, on the contrary, the most transparent
Substances, may, by evacuating their Pores, or separating their parts,
be render'd sufficiently opake; as Salts or wet Paper, or the _Oculus
Mundi_ Stone by being dried, Horn by being scraped, Glass by being
reduced to Powder, or otherwise flawed; Turpentine by being stirred
about with Water till they mix imperfectly, and Water by being form'd
into many small Bubbles, either alone in the form of Froth, or by
shaking it together with Oil of Turpentine, or Oil Olive, or with some
other convenient Liquor, with which it will not perfectly incorporate.
And to the increase of the opacity of these Bodies, it conduces
something, that by the 23d Observation the Reflexions of very thin
transparent Substances are considerably stronger than those made by the
same Substances of a greater thickness.


PROP. IV.

_The Parts of Bodies and their Interstices must not be less than of some
definite bigness, to render them opake and colour'd._

For the opakest Bodies, if their parts be subtilly divided, (as Metals,
by being dissolved in acid Menstruums, &c.) become perfectly
transparent. And you may also remember, that in the eighth Observation
there was no sensible reflexion at the Superficies of the
Object-glasses, where they were very near one another, though they did
not absolutely touch. And in the 17th Observation the Reflexion of the
Water-bubble where it became thinnest was almost insensible, so as to
cause very black Spots to appear on the top of the Bubble, by the want
of reflected Light.

On these grounds I perceive it is that Water, Salt, Glass, Stones, and
such like Substances, are transparent. For, upon divers Considerations,
they seem to be as full of Pores or Interstices between their parts as
other Bodies are, but yet their Parts and Interstices to be too small to
cause Reflexions in their common Surfaces.


PROP. V.

_The transparent parts of Bodies, according to their several sizes,
reflect Rays of one Colour, and transmit those of another, on the same
grounds that thin Plates or Bubbles do reflect or transmit those Rays.
And this I take to be the ground of all their Colours._

For if a thinn'd or plated Body, which being of an even thickness,
appears all over of one uniform Colour, should be slit into Threads, or
broken into Fragments, of the same thickness with the Plate; I see no
reason why every Thread or Fragment should not keep its Colour, and by
consequence why a heap of those Threads or Fragments should not
constitute a Mass or Powder of the same Colour, which the Plate
exhibited before it was broken. And the parts of all natural Bodies
being like so many Fragments of a Plate, must on the same grounds
exhibit the same Colours.

Now, that they do so will appear by the affinity of their Properties.
The finely colour'd Feathers of some Birds, and particularly those of
Peacocks Tails, do, in the very same part of the Feather, appear of
several Colours in several Positions of the Eye, after the very same
manner that thin Plates were found to do in the 7th and 19th
Observations, and therefore their Colours arise from the thinness of the
transparent parts of the Feathers; that is, from the slenderness of the
very fine Hairs, or _Capillamenta_, which grow out of the sides of the
grosser lateral Branches or Fibres of those Feathers. And to the same
purpose it is, that the Webs of some Spiders, by being spun very fine,
have appeared colour'd, as some have observ'd, and that the colour'd
Fibres of some Silks, by varying the Position of the Eye, do vary their
Colour. Also the Colours of Silks, Cloths, and other Substances, which
Water or Oil can intimately penetrate, become more faint and obscure by
being immerged in those Liquors, and recover their Vigor again by being
dried; much after the manner declared of thin Bodies in the 10th and
21st Observations. Leaf-Gold, some sorts of painted Glass, the Infusion
of _Lignum Nephriticum_, and some other Substances, reflect one Colour,
and transmit another; like thin Bodies in the 9th and 20th Observations.
And some of those colour'd Powders which Painters use, may have their
Colours a little changed, by being very elaborately and finely ground.
Where I see not what can be justly pretended for those changes, besides
the breaking of their parts into less parts by that contrition, after
the same manner that the Colour of a thin Plate is changed by varying
its thickness. For which reason also it is that the colour'd Flowers of
Plants and Vegetables, by being bruised, usually become more transparent
than before, or at least in some degree or other change their Colours.
Nor is it much less to my purpose, that, by mixing divers Liquors, very
odd and remarkable Productions and Changes of Colours may be effected,
of which no cause can be more obvious and rational than that the saline
Corpuscles of one Liquor do variously act upon or unite with the tinging
Corpuscles of another, so as to make them swell, or shrink, (whereby not
only their bulk but their density also may be changed,) or to divide
them into smaller Corpuscles, (whereby a colour'd Liquor may become
transparent,) or to make many of them associate into one cluster,
whereby two transparent Liquors may compose a colour'd one. For we see
how apt those saline Menstruums are to penetrate and dissolve Substances
to which they are applied, and some of them to precipitate what others
dissolve. In like manner, if we consider the various Phænomena of the
Atmosphere, we may observe, that when Vapours are first raised, they
hinder not the transparency of the Air, being divided into parts too
small to cause any Reflexion in their Superficies. But when in order to
compose drops of Rain they begin to coalesce and constitute Globules of
all intermediate sizes, those Globules, when they become of convenient
size to reflect some Colours and transmit others, may constitute Clouds
of various Colours according to their sizes. And I see not what can be
rationally conceived in so transparent a Substance as Water for the
production of these Colours, besides the various sizes of its fluid and
globular Parcels.


PROP. VI.

_The parts of Bodies on which their Colours depend, are denser than the
Medium which pervades their Interstices._

This will appear by considering, that the Colour of a Body depends not
only on the Rays which are incident perpendicularly on its parts, but on
those also which are incident at all other Angles. And that according to
the 7th Observation, a very little variation of obliquity will change
the reflected Colour, where the thin Body or small Particles is rarer
than the ambient Medium, insomuch that such a small Particle will at
diversly oblique Incidences reflect all sorts of Colours, in so great a
variety that the Colour resulting from them all, confusedly reflected
from a heap of such Particles, must rather be a white or grey than any
other Colour, or at best it must be but a very imperfect and dirty
Colour. Whereas if the thin Body or small Particle be much denser than
the ambient Medium, the Colours, according to the 19th Observation, are
so little changed by the variation of obliquity, that the Rays which
are reflected least obliquely may predominate over the rest, so much as
to cause a heap of such Particles to appear very intensely of their
Colour.

It conduces also something to the confirmation of this Proposition,
that, according to the 22d Observation, the Colours exhibited by the
denser thin Body within the rarer, are more brisk than those exhibited
by the rarer within the denser.


PROP. VII.

_The bigness of the component parts of natural Bodies may be conjectured
by their Colours._

For since the parts of these Bodies, by _Prop._ 5. do most probably
exhibit the same Colours with a Plate of equal thickness, provided they
have the same refractive density; and since their parts seem for the
most part to have much the same density with Water or Glass, as by many
circumstances is obvious to collect; to determine the sizes of those
parts, you need only have recourse to the precedent Tables, in which the
thickness of Water or Glass exhibiting any Colour is expressed. Thus if
it be desired to know the diameter of a Corpuscle, which being of equal
density with Glass shall reflect green of the third Order; the Number
16-1/4 shews it to be (16-1/4)/10000 parts of an Inch.

The greatest difficulty is here to know of what Order the Colour of any
Body is. And for this end we must have recourse to the 4th and 18th
Observations; from whence may be collected these particulars.

_Scarlets_, and other _reds_, _oranges_, and _yellows_, if they be pure
and intense, are most probably of the second order. Those of the first
and third order also may be pretty good; only the yellow of the first
order is faint, and the orange and red of the third Order have a great
Mixture of violet and blue.

There may be good _Greens_ of the fourth Order, but the purest are of
the third. And of this Order the green of all Vegetables seems to be,
partly by reason of the Intenseness of their Colours, and partly because
when they wither some of them turn to a greenish yellow, and others to a
more perfect yellow or orange, or perhaps to red, passing first through
all the aforesaid intermediate Colours. Which Changes seem to be
effected by the exhaling of the Moisture which may leave the tinging
Corpuscles more dense, and something augmented by the Accretion of the
oily and earthy Part of that Moisture. Now the green, without doubt, is
of the same Order with those Colours into which it changeth, because the
Changes are gradual, and those Colours, though usually not very full,
yet are often too full and lively to be of the fourth Order.

_Blues_ and _Purples_ may be either of the second or third Order, but
the best are of the third. Thus the Colour of Violets seems to be of
that Order, because their Syrup by acid Liquors turns red, and by
urinous and alcalizate turns green. For since it is of the Nature of
Acids to dissolve or attenuate, and of Alcalies to precipitate or
incrassate, if the Purple Colour of the Syrup was of the second Order,
an acid Liquor by attenuating its tinging Corpuscles would change it to
a red of the first Order, and an Alcali by incrassating them would
change it to a green of the second Order; which red and green,
especially the green, seem too imperfect to be the Colours produced by
these Changes. But if the said Purple be supposed of the third Order,
its Change to red of the second, and green of the third, may without any
Inconvenience be allow'd.

If there be found any Body of a deeper and less reddish Purple than that
of the Violets, its Colour most probably is of the second Order. But yet
there being no Body commonly known whose Colour is constantly more deep
than theirs, I have made use of their Name to denote the deepest and
least reddish Purples, such as manifestly transcend their Colour in
purity.

The _blue_ of the first Order, though very faint and little, may
possibly be the Colour of some Substances; and particularly the azure
Colour of the Skies seems to be of this Order. For all Vapours when they
begin to condense and coalesce into small Parcels, become first of that
Bigness, whereby such an Azure must be reflected before they can
constitute Clouds of other Colours. And so this being the first Colour
which Vapours begin to reflect, it ought to be the Colour of the finest
and most transparent Skies, in which Vapours are not arrived to that
Grossness requisite to reflect other Colours, as we find it is by
Experience.

_Whiteness_, if most intense and luminous, is that of the first Order,
if less strong and luminous, a Mixture of the Colours of several Orders.
Of this last kind is the Whiteness of Froth, Paper, Linnen, and most
white Substances; of the former I reckon that of white Metals to be. For
whilst the densest of Metals, Gold, if foliated, is transparent, and all
Metals become transparent if dissolved in Menstruums or vitrified, the
Opacity of white Metals ariseth not from their Density alone. They being
less dense than Gold would be more transparent than it, did not some
other Cause concur with their Density to make them opake. And this Cause
I take to be such a Bigness of their Particles as fits them to reflect
the white of the first order. For, if they be of other Thicknesses they
may reflect other Colours, as is manifest by the Colours which appear
upon hot Steel in tempering it, and sometimes upon the Surface of melted
Metals in the Skin or Scoria which arises upon them in their cooling.
And as the white of the first order is the strongest which can be made
by Plates of transparent Substances, so it ought to be stronger in the
denser Substances of Metals than in the rarer of Air, Water, and Glass.
Nor do I see but that metallick Substances of such a Thickness as may
fit them to reflect the white of the first order, may, by reason of
their great Density (according to the Tenor of the first of these
Propositions) reflect all the Light incident upon them, and so be as
opake and splendent as it's possible for any Body to be. Gold, or Copper
mix'd with less than half their Weight of Silver, or Tin, or Regulus of
Antimony, in fusion, or amalgamed with a very little Mercury, become
white; which shews both that the Particles of white Metals have much
more Superficies, and so are smaller, than those of Gold and Copper, and
also that they are so opake as not to suffer the Particles of Gold or
Copper to shine through them. Now it is scarce to be doubted but that
the Colours of Gold and Copper are of the second and third order, and
therefore the Particles of white Metals cannot be much bigger than is
requisite to make them reflect the white of the first order. The
Volatility of Mercury argues that they are not much bigger, nor may they
be much less, lest they lose their Opacity, and become either
transparent as they do when attenuated by Vitrification, or by Solution
in Menstruums, or black as they do when ground smaller, by rubbing
Silver, or Tin, or Lead, upon other Substances to draw black Lines. The
first and only Colour which white Metals take by grinding their
Particles smaller, is black, and therefore their white ought to be that
which borders upon the black Spot in the Center of the Rings of Colours,
that is, the white of the first order. But, if you would hence gather
the Bigness of metallick Particles, you must allow for their Density.
For were Mercury transparent, its Density is such that the Sine of
Incidence upon it (by my Computation) would be to the Sine of its
Refraction, as 71 to 20, or 7 to 2. And therefore the Thickness of its
Particles, that they may exhibit the same Colours with those of Bubbles
of Water, ought to be less than the Thickness of the Skin of those
Bubbles in the Proportion of 2 to 7. Whence it's possible, that the
Particles of Mercury may be as little as the Particles of some
transparent and volatile Fluids, and yet reflect the white of the first
order.

Lastly, for the production of _black_, the Corpuscles must be less than
any of those which exhibit Colours. For at all greater sizes there is
too much Light reflected to constitute this Colour. But if they be
supposed a little less than is requisite to reflect the white and very
faint blue of the first order, they will, according to the 4th, 8th,
17th and 18th Observations, reflect so very little Light as to appear
intensely black, and yet may perhaps variously refract it to and fro
within themselves so long, until it happen to be stifled and lost, by
which means they will appear black in all positions of the Eye without
any transparency. And from hence may be understood why Fire, and the
more subtile dissolver Putrefaction, by dividing the Particles of
Substances, turn them to black, why small quantities of black Substances
impart their Colour very freely and intensely to other Substances to
which they are applied; the minute Particles of these, by reason of
their very great number, easily overspreading the gross Particles of
others; why Glass ground very elaborately with Sand on a Copper Plate,
'till it be well polish'd, makes the Sand, together with what is worn
off from the Glass and Copper, become very black: why black Substances
do soonest of all others become hot in the Sun's Light and burn, (which
Effect may proceed partly from the multitude of Refractions in a little
room, and partly from the easy Commotion of so very small Corpuscles;)
and why blacks are usually a little inclined to a bluish Colour. For
that they are so may be seen by illuminating white Paper by Light
reflected from black Substances. For the Paper will usually appear of a
bluish white; and the reason is, that black borders in the obscure blue
of the order described in the 18th Observation, and therefore reflects
more Rays of that Colour than of any other.

In these Descriptions I have been the more particular, because it is not
impossible but that Microscopes may at length be improved to the
discovery of the Particles of Bodies on which their Colours depend, if
they are not already in some measure arrived to that degree of
perfection. For if those Instruments are or can be so far improved as
with sufficient distinctness to represent Objects five or six hundred
times bigger than at a Foot distance they appear to our naked Eyes, I
should hope that we might be able to discover some of the greatest of
those Corpuscles. And by one that would magnify three or four thousand
times perhaps they might all be discover'd, but those which produce
blackness. In the mean while I see nothing material in this Discourse
that may rationally be doubted of, excepting this Position: That
transparent Corpuscles of the same thickness and density with a Plate,
do exhibit the same Colour. And this I would have understood not without
some Latitude, as well because those Corpuscles may be of irregular
Figures, and many Rays must be obliquely incident on them, and so have
a shorter way through them than the length of their Diameters, as
because the straitness of the Medium put in on all sides within such
Corpuscles may a little alter its Motions or other qualities on which
the Reflexion depends. But yet I cannot much suspect the last, because I
have observed of some small Plates of Muscovy Glass which were of an
even thickness, that through a Microscope they have appeared of the same
Colour at their edges and corners where the included Medium was
terminated, which they appeared of in other places. However it will add
much to our Satisfaction, if those Corpuscles can be discover'd with
Microscopes; which if we shall at length attain to, I fear it will be
the utmost improvement of this Sense. For it seems impossible to see the
more secret and noble Works of Nature within the Corpuscles by reason of
their transparency.


PROP. VIII.

_The Cause of Reflexion is not the impinging of Light on the solid or
impervious parts of Bodies, as is commonly believed._

This will appear by the following Considerations. First, That in the
passage of Light out of Glass into Air there is a Reflexion as strong as
in its passage out of Air into Glass, or rather a little stronger, and
by many degrees stronger than in its passage out of Glass into Water.
And it seems not probable that Air should have more strongly reflecting
parts than Water or Glass. But if that should possibly be supposed, yet
it will avail nothing; for the Reflexion is as strong or stronger when
the Air is drawn away from the Glass, (suppose by the Air-Pump invented
by _Otto Gueriet_, and improved and made useful by Mr. _Boyle_) as when
it is adjacent to it. Secondly, If Light in its passage out of Glass
into Air be incident more obliquely than at an Angle of 40 or 41 Degrees
it is wholly reflected, if less obliquely it is in great measure
transmitted. Now it is not to be imagined that Light at one degree of
obliquity should meet with Pores enough in the Air to transmit the
greater part of it, and at another degree of obliquity should meet with
nothing but parts to reflect it wholly, especially considering that in
its passage out of Air into Glass, how oblique soever be its Incidence,
it finds Pores enough in the Glass to transmit a great part of it. If
any Man suppose that it is not reflected by the Air, but by the outmost
superficial parts of the Glass, there is still the same difficulty:
Besides, that such a Supposition is unintelligible, and will also appear
to be false by applying Water behind some part of the Glass instead of
Air. For so in a convenient obliquity of the Rays, suppose of 45 or 46
Degrees, at which they are all reflected where the Air is adjacent to
the Glass, they shall be in great measure transmitted where the Water is
adjacent to it; which argues, that their Reflexion or Transmission
depends on the constitution of the Air and Water behind the Glass, and
not on the striking of the Rays upon the parts of the Glass. Thirdly,
If the Colours made by a Prism placed at the entrance of a Beam of Light
into a darken'd Room be successively cast on a second Prism placed at a
greater distance from the former, in such manner that they are all alike
incident upon it, the second Prism may be so inclined to the incident
Rays, that those which are of a blue Colour shall be all reflected by
it, and yet those of a red Colour pretty copiously transmitted. Now if
the Reflexion be caused by the parts of Air or Glass, I would ask, why
at the same Obliquity of Incidence the blue should wholly impinge on
those parts, so as to be all reflected, and yet the red find Pores
enough to be in a great measure transmitted. Fourthly, Where two Glasses
touch one another, there is no sensible Reflexion, as was declared in
the first Observation; and yet I see no reason why the Rays should not
impinge on the parts of Glass, as much when contiguous to other Glass as
when contiguous to Air. Fifthly, When the top of a Water-Bubble (in the
17th Observation,) by the continual subsiding and exhaling of the Water
grew very thin, there was such a little and almost insensible quantity
of Light reflected from it, that it appeared intensely black; whereas
round about that black Spot, where the Water was thicker, the Reflexion
was so strong as to make the Water seem very white. Nor is it only at
the least thickness of thin Plates or Bubbles, that there is no manifest
Reflexion, but at many other thicknesses continually greater and
greater. For in the 15th Observation the Rays of the same Colour were by
turns transmitted at one thickness, and reflected at another thickness,
for an indeterminate number of Successions. And yet in the Superficies
of the thinned Body, where it is of any one thickness, there are as many
parts for the Rays to impinge on, as where it is of any other thickness.
Sixthly, If Reflexion were caused by the parts of reflecting Bodies, it
would be impossible for thin Plates or Bubbles, at one and the same
place, to reflect the Rays of one Colour, and transmit those of another,
as they do according to the 13th and 15th Observations. For it is not to
be imagined that at one place the Rays which, for instance, exhibit a
blue Colour, should have the fortune to dash upon the parts, and those
which exhibit a red to hit upon the Pores of the Body; and then at
another place, where the Body is either a little thicker or a little
thinner, that on the contrary the blue should hit upon its pores, and
the red upon its parts. Lastly, Were the Rays of Light reflected by
impinging on the solid parts of Bodies, their Reflexions from polish'd
Bodies could not be so regular as they are. For in polishing Glass with
Sand, Putty, or Tripoly, it is not to be imagined that those Substances
can, by grating and fretting the Glass, bring all its least Particles to
an accurate Polish; so that all their Surfaces shall be truly plain or
truly spherical, and look all the same way, so as together to compose
one even Surface. The smaller the Particles of those Substances are, the
smaller will be the Scratches by which they continually fret and wear
away the Glass until it be polish'd; but be they never so small they can
wear away the Glass no otherwise than by grating and scratching it, and
breaking the Protuberances; and therefore polish it no otherwise than by
bringing its roughness to a very fine Grain, so that the Scratches and
Frettings of the Surface become too small to be visible. And therefore
if Light were reflected by impinging upon the solid parts of the Glass,
it would be scatter'd as much by the most polish'd Glass as by the
roughest. So then it remains a Problem, how Glass polish'd by fretting
Substances can reflect Light so regularly as it does. And this Problem
is scarce otherwise to be solved, than by saying, that the Reflexion of
a Ray is effected, not by a single point of the reflecting Body, but by
some power of the Body which is evenly diffused all over its Surface,
and by which it acts upon the Ray without immediate Contact. For that
the parts of Bodies do act upon Light at a distance shall be shewn
hereafter.

Now if Light be reflected, not by impinging on the solid parts of
Bodies, but by some other principle; it's probable that as many of its
Rays as impinge on the solid parts of Bodies are not reflected but
stifled and lost in the Bodies. For otherwise we must allow two sorts of
Reflexions. Should all the Rays be reflected which impinge on the
internal parts of clear Water or Crystal, those Substances would rather
have a cloudy Colour than a clear Transparency. To make Bodies look
black, it's necessary that many Rays be stopp'd, retained, and lost in
them; and it seems not probable that any Rays can be stopp'd and
stifled in them which do not impinge on their parts.

And hence we may understand that Bodies are much more rare and porous
than is commonly believed. Water is nineteen times lighter, and by
consequence nineteen times rarer than Gold; and Gold is so rare as very
readily and without the least opposition to transmit the magnetick
Effluvia, and easily to admit Quicksilver into its Pores, and to let
Water pass through it. For a concave Sphere of Gold filled with Water,
and solder'd up, has, upon pressing the Sphere with great force, let the
Water squeeze through it, and stand all over its outside in multitudes
of small Drops, like Dew, without bursting or cracking the Body of the
Gold, as I have been inform'd by an Eye witness. From all which we may
conclude, that Gold has more Pores than solid parts, and by consequence
that Water has above forty times more Pores than Parts. And he that
shall find out an Hypothesis, by which Water may be so rare, and yet not
be capable of compression by force, may doubtless by the same Hypothesis
make Gold, and Water, and all other Bodies, as much rarer as he pleases;
so that Light may find a ready passage through transparent Substances.

The Magnet acts upon Iron through all dense Bodies not magnetick nor red
hot, without any diminution of its Virtue; as for instance, through
Gold, Silver, Lead, Glass, Water. The gravitating Power of the Sun is
transmitted through the vast Bodies of the Planets without any
diminution, so as to act upon all their parts to their very centers
with the same Force and according to the same Laws, as if the part upon
which it acts were not surrounded with the Body of the Planet, The Rays
of Light, whether they be very small Bodies projected, or only Motion or
Force propagated, are moved in right Lines; and whenever a Ray of Light
is by any Obstacle turned out of its rectilinear way, it will never
return into the same rectilinear way, unless perhaps by very great
accident. And yet Light is transmitted through pellucid solid Bodies in
right Lines to very great distances. How Bodies can have a sufficient
quantity of Pores for producing these Effects is very difficult to
conceive, but perhaps not altogether impossible. For the Colours of
Bodies arise from the Magnitudes of the Particles which reflect them, as
was explained above. Now if we conceive these Particles of Bodies to be
so disposed amongst themselves, that the Intervals or empty Spaces
between them may be equal in magnitude to them all; and that these
Particles may be composed of other Particles much smaller, which have as
much empty Space between them as equals all the Magnitudes of these
smaller Particles: And that in like manner these smaller Particles are
again composed of others much smaller, all which together are equal to
all the Pores or empty Spaces between them; and so on perpetually till
you come to solid Particles, such as have no Pores or empty Spaces
within them: And if in any gross Body there be, for instance, three such
degrees of Particles, the least of which are solid; this Body will have
seven times more Pores than solid Parts. But if there be four such
degrees of Particles, the least of which are solid, the Body will have
fifteen times more Pores than solid Parts. If there be five degrees, the
Body will have one and thirty times more Pores than solid Parts. If six
degrees, the Body will have sixty and three times more Pores than solid
Parts. And so on perpetually. And there are other ways of conceiving how
Bodies may be exceeding porous. But what is really their inward Frame is
not yet known to us.


PROP. IX.

_Bodies reflect and refract Light by one and the same power, variously
exercised in various Circumstances._

This appears by several Considerations. First, Because when Light goes
out of Glass into Air, as obliquely as it can possibly do. If its
Incidence be made still more oblique, it becomes totally reflected. For
the power of the Glass after it has refracted the Light as obliquely as
is possible, if the Incidence be still made more oblique, becomes too
strong to let any of its Rays go through, and by consequence causes
total Reflexions. Secondly, Because Light is alternately reflected and
transmitted by thin Plates of Glass for many Successions, accordingly as
the thickness of the Plate increases in an arithmetical Progression. For
here the thickness of the Glass determines whether that Power by which
Glass acts upon Light shall cause it to be reflected, or suffer it to
be transmitted. And, Thirdly, because those Surfaces of transparent
Bodies which have the greatest refracting power, reflect the greatest
quantity of Light, as was shewn in the first Proposition.


PROP. X.

_If Light be swifter in Bodies than in Vacuo, in the proportion of the
Sines which measure the Refraction of the Bodies, the Forces of the
Bodies to reflect and refract Light, are very nearly proportional to the
densities of the same Bodies; excepting that unctuous and sulphureous
Bodies refract more than others of this same density._

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

Let AB represent the refracting plane Surface of any Body, and IC a Ray
incident very obliquely upon the Body in C, so that the Angle ACI may be
infinitely little, and let CR be the refracted Ray. From a given Point B
perpendicular to the refracting Surface erect BR meeting with the
refracting Ray CR in R, and if CR represent the Motion of the refracted
Ray, and this Motion be distinguish'd into two Motions CB and BR,
whereof CB is parallel to the refracting Plane, and BR perpendicular to
it: CB shall represent the Motion of the incident Ray, and BR the
Motion generated by the Refraction, as Opticians have of late explain'd.

Now if any Body or Thing, in moving through any Space of a given breadth
terminated on both sides by two parallel Planes, be urged forward in all
parts of that Space by Forces tending directly forwards towards the last
Plane, and before its Incidence on the first Plane, had no Motion
towards it, or but an infinitely little one; and if the Forces in all
parts of that Space, between the Planes, be at equal distances from the
Planes equal to one another, but at several distances be bigger or less
in any given Proportion, the Motion generated by the Forces in the whole
passage of the Body or thing through that Space shall be in a
subduplicate Proportion of the Forces, as Mathematicians will easily
understand. And therefore, if the Space of activity of the refracting
Superficies of the Body be consider'd as such a Space, the Motion of the
Ray generated by the refracting Force of the Body, during its passage
through that Space, that is, the Motion BR, must be in subduplicate
Proportion of that refracting Force. I say therefore, that the Square of
the Line BR, and by consequence the refracting Force of the Body, is
very nearly as the density of the same Body. For this will appear by the
following Table, wherein the Proportion of the Sines which measure the
Refractions of several Bodies, the Square of BR, supposing CB an unite,
the Densities of the Bodies estimated by their Specifick Gravities, and
their Refractive Power in respect of their Densities are set down in
several Columns.

---------------------+----------------+----------------+----------+-----------
                     |                |                |          |
                     |                | The Square     | The      | The
                     |                | of BR, to      | density  | refractive
                     | The Proportion | which the      | and      | Power of
                     | of the Sines of| refracting     | specifick| the Body
                     | Incidence and  | force of the   | gravity  | in respect
   The refracting    | Refraction of  | Body is        | of the   | of its
      Bodies.        | yellow Light.  | proportionate. | Body.    | density.
---------------------+----------------+----------------+----------+-----------
A Pseudo-Topazius,   |                |                |          |
  being a natural,   |                |                |          |
  pellucid, brittle, |   23 to   14   |    1'699       |  4'27    |   3979
  hairy Stone, of a  |                |                |          |
  yellow Colour.     |                |                |          |
Air.                 | 3201 to 3200   |    0'000625    |  0'0012  |   5208
Glass of Antimony.   |   17 to    9   |    2'568       |  5'28    |   4864
A Selenitis.         |   61 to   41   |    1'213       |  2'252   |   5386
Glass vulgar.        |   31 to   20   |    1'4025      |  2'58    |   5436
Crystal of the Rock. |   25 to   16   |    1'445       |  2'65    |   5450
Island Crystal.      |    5 to    3   |    1'778       |  2'72    |   6536
Sal Gemmæ.           |   17 to   11   |    1'388       |  2'143   |   6477
Alume.               |   35 to   24   |    1'1267      |  1'714   |   6570
Borax.               |   22 to   15   |    1'1511      |  1'714   |   6716
Niter.               |   32 to   21   |    1'345       |  1'9     |   7079
Dantzick Vitriol.    |  303 to  200   |    1'295       |  1'715   |   7551
Oil of Vitriol.      |   10 to    7   |    1'041       |  1'7     |   6124
Rain Water.          |  529 to  396   |    0'7845      |  1'      |   7845
Gum Arabick.         |   31 to   21   |    1'179       |  1'375   |   8574
Spirit of Wine well  |                |                |          |
  rectified.         |  100 to   73   |    0'8765      |  0'866   |  10121
Camphire.            |    3 to    2   |    1'25        |  0'996   |  12551
Oil Olive.           |   22 to   15   |    1'1511      |  0'913   |  12607
Linseed Oil.         |   40 to   27   |    1'1948      |  0'932   |  12819
Spirit of Turpentine.|   25 to   17   |    1'1626      |  0'874   |  13222
Amber.               |   14 to    9   |    1'42        |  1'04    |  13654
A Diamond.           |  100 to   41   |    4'949       |  3'4     |  14556
---------------------+----------------+----------------+----------+-----------

The Refraction of the Air in this Table is determin'd by that of the
Atmosphere observed by Astronomers. For, if Light pass through many
refracting Substances or Mediums gradually denser and denser, and
terminated with parallel Surfaces, the Sum of all the Refractions will
be equal to the single Refraction which it would have suffer'd in
passing immediately out of the first Medium into the last. And this
holds true, though the Number of the refracting Substances be increased
to Infinity, and the Distances from one another as much decreased, so
that the Light may be refracted in every Point of its Passage, and by
continual Refractions bent into a Curve-Line. And therefore the whole
Refraction of Light in passing through the Atmosphere from the highest
and rarest Part thereof down to the lowest and densest Part, must be
equal to the Refraction which it would suffer in passing at like
Obliquity out of a Vacuum immediately into Air of equal Density with
that in the lowest Part of the Atmosphere.

Now, although a Pseudo-Topaz, a Selenitis, Rock Crystal, Island Crystal,
Vulgar Glass (that is, Sand melted together) and Glass of Antimony,
which are terrestrial stony alcalizate Concretes, and Air which probably
arises from such Substances by Fermentation, be Substances very
differing from one another in Density, yet by this Table, they have
their refractive Powers almost in the same Proportion to one another as
their Densities are, excepting that the Refraction of that strange
Substance, Island Crystal is a little bigger than the rest. And
particularly Air, which is 3500 Times rarer than the Pseudo-Topaz, and
4400 Times rarer than Glass of Antimony, and 2000 Times rarer than the
Selenitis, Glass vulgar, or Crystal of the Rock, has notwithstanding its
rarity the same refractive Power in respect of its Density which those
very dense Substances have in respect of theirs, excepting so far as
those differ from one another.

Again, the Refraction of Camphire, Oil Olive, Linseed Oil, Spirit of
Turpentine and Amber, which are fat sulphureous unctuous Bodies, and a
Diamond, which probably is an unctuous Substance coagulated, have their
refractive Powers in Proportion to one another as their Densities
without any considerable Variation. But the refractive Powers of these
unctuous Substances are two or three Times greater in respect of their
Densities than the refractive Powers of the former Substances in respect
of theirs.

Water has a refractive Power in a middle degree between those two sorts
of Substances, and probably is of a middle nature. For out of it grow
all vegetable and animal Substances, which consist as well of
sulphureous fat and inflamable Parts, as of earthy lean and alcalizate
ones.

Salts and Vitriols have refractive Powers in a middle degree between
those of earthy Substances and Water, and accordingly are composed of
those two sorts of Substances. For by distillation and rectification of
their Spirits a great Part of them goes into Water, and a great Part
remains behind in the form of a dry fix'd Earth capable of
Vitrification.

Spirit of Wine has a refractive Power in a middle degree between those
of Water and oily Substances, and accordingly seems to be composed of
both, united by Fermentation; the Water, by means of some saline Spirits
with which 'tis impregnated, dissolving the Oil, and volatizing it by
the Action. For Spirit of Wine is inflamable by means of its oily Parts,
and being distilled often from Salt of Tartar, grow by every
distillation more and more aqueous and phlegmatick. And Chymists
observe, that Vegetables (as Lavender, Rue, Marjoram, &c.) distilled
_per se_, before fermentation yield Oils without any burning Spirits,
but after fermentation yield ardent Spirits without Oils: Which shews,
that their Oil is by fermentation converted into Spirit. They find also,
that if Oils be poured in a small quantity upon fermentating Vegetables,
they distil over after fermentation in the form of Spirits.

So then, by the foregoing Table, all Bodies seem to have their
refractive Powers proportional to their Densities, (or very nearly;)
excepting so far as they partake more or less of sulphureous oily
Particles, and thereby have their refractive Power made greater or less.
Whence it seems rational to attribute the refractive Power of all Bodies
chiefly, if not wholly, to the sulphureous Parts with which they abound.
For it's probable that all Bodies abound more or less with Sulphurs. And
as Light congregated by a Burning-glass acts most upon sulphureous
Bodies, to turn them into Fire and Flame; so, since all Action is
mutual, Sulphurs ought to act most upon Light. For that the action
between Light and Bodies is mutual, may appear from this Consideration;
That the densest Bodies which refract and reflect Light most strongly,
grow hottest in the Summer Sun, by the action of the refracted or
reflected Light.

I have hitherto explain'd the power of Bodies to reflect and refract,
and shew'd, that thin transparent Plates, Fibres, and Particles, do,
according to their several thicknesses and densities, reflect several
sorts of Rays, and thereby appear of several Colours; and by consequence
that nothing more is requisite for producing all the Colours of natural
Bodies, than the several sizes and densities of their transparent
Particles. But whence it is that these Plates, Fibres, and Particles,
do, according to their several thicknesses and densities, reflect
several sorts of Rays, I have not yet explain'd. To give some insight
into this matter, and make way for understanding the next part of this
Book, I shall conclude this part with a few more Propositions. Those
which preceded respect the nature of Bodies, these the nature of Light:
For both must be understood, before the reason of their Actions upon one
another can be known. And because the last Proposition depended upon the
velocity of Light, I will begin with a Proposition of that kind.


PROP. XI.

_Light is propagated from luminous Bodies in time, and spends about
seven or eight Minutes of an Hour in passing from the Sun to the Earth._

This was observed first by _Roemer_, and then by others, by means of the
Eclipses of the Satellites of _Jupiter_. For these Eclipses, when the
Earth is between the Sun and _Jupiter_, happen about seven or eight
Minutes sooner than they ought to do by the Tables, and when the Earth
is beyond the Sun they happen about seven or eight Minutes later than
they ought to do; the reason being, that the Light of the Satellites has
farther to go in the latter case than in the former by the Diameter of
the Earth's Orbit. Some inequalities of time may arise from the
Excentricities of the Orbs of the Satellites; but those cannot answer in
all the Satellites, and at all times to the Position and Distance of the
Earth from the Sun. The mean motions of _Jupiter_'s Satellites is also
swifter in his descent from his Aphelium to his Perihelium, than in his
ascent in the other half of his Orb. But this inequality has no respect
to the position of the Earth, and in the three interior Satellites is
insensible, as I find by computation from the Theory of their Gravity.


PROP. XII.

_Every Ray of Light in its passage through any refracting Surface is put
into a certain transient Constitution or State, which in the progress of
the Ray returns at equal Intervals, and disposes the Ray at every return
to be easily transmitted through the next refracting Surface, and
between the returns to be easily reflected by it._

This is manifest by the 5th, 9th, 12th, and 15th Observations. For by
those Observations it appears, that one and the same sort of Rays at
equal Angles of Incidence on any thin transparent Plate, is alternately
reflected and transmitted for many Successions accordingly as the
thickness of the Plate increases in arithmetical Progression of the
Numbers, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, &c. so that if the first Reflexion
(that which makes the first or innermost of the Rings of Colours there
described) be made at the thickness 1, the Rays shall be transmitted at
the thicknesses 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, &c. and thereby make the central
Spot and Rings of Light, which appear by transmission, and be reflected
at the thickness 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, &c. and thereby make the Rings which
appear by Reflexion. And this alternate Reflexion and Transmission, as I
gather by the 24th Observation, continues for above an hundred
vicissitudes, and by the Observations in the next part of this Book, for
many thousands, being propagated from one Surface of a Glass Plate to
the other, though the thickness of the Plate be a quarter of an Inch or
above: So that this alternation seems to be propagated from every
refracting Surface to all distances without end or limitation.

This alternate Reflexion and Refraction depends on both the Surfaces of
every thin Plate, because it depends on their distance. By the 21st
Observation, if either Surface of a thin Plate of _Muscovy_ Glass be
wetted, the Colours caused by the alternate Reflexion and Refraction
grow faint, and therefore it depends on them both.

It is therefore perform'd at the second Surface; for if it were
perform'd at the first, before the Rays arrive at the second, it would
not depend on the second.

It is also influenced by some action or disposition, propagated from the
first to the second, because otherwise at the second it would not depend
on the first. And this action or disposition, in its propagation,
intermits and returns by equal Intervals, because in all its progress it
inclines the Ray at one distance from the first Surface to be reflected
by the second, at another to be transmitted by it, and that by equal
Intervals for innumerable vicissitudes. And because the Ray is disposed
to Reflexion at the distances 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, &c. and to Transmission at
the distances 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, &c. (for its transmission through the
first Surface, is at the distance 0, and it is transmitted through both
together, if their distance be infinitely little or much less than 1)
the disposition to be transmitted at the distances 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, &c.
is to be accounted a return of the same disposition which the Ray first
had at the distance 0, that is at its transmission through the first
refracting Surface. All which is the thing I would prove.

What kind of action or disposition this is; Whether it consists in a
circulating or a vibrating motion of the Ray, or of the Medium, or
something else, I do not here enquire. Those that are averse from
assenting to any new Discoveries, but such as they can explain by an
Hypothesis, may for the present suppose, that as Stones by falling upon
Water put the Water into an undulating Motion, and all Bodies by
percussion excite vibrations in the Air; so the Rays of Light, by
impinging on any refracting or reflecting Surface, excite vibrations in
the refracting or reflecting Medium or Substance, and by exciting them
agitate the solid parts of the refracting or reflecting Body, and by
agitating them cause the Body to grow warm or hot; that the vibrations
thus excited are propagated in the refracting or reflecting Medium or
Substance, much after the manner that vibrations are propagated in the
Air for causing Sound, and move faster than the Rays so as to overtake
them; and that when any Ray is in that part of the vibration which
conspires with its Motion, it easily breaks through a refracting
Surface, but when it is in the contrary part of the vibration which
impedes its Motion, it is easily reflected; and, by consequence, that
every Ray is successively disposed to be easily reflected, or easily
transmitted, by every vibration which overtakes it. But whether this
Hypothesis be true or false I do not here consider. I content my self
with the bare Discovery, that the Rays of Light are by some cause or
other alternately disposed to be reflected or refracted for many
vicissitudes.


DEFINITION.

_The returns of the disposition of any Ray to be reflected I will call
its_ Fits of easy Reflexion, _and those of its disposition to be
transmitted its_ Fits of easy Transmission, _and the space it passes
between every return and the next return, the_ Interval of its Fits.


PROP. XIII.

_The reason why the Surfaces of all thick transparent Bodies reflect
part of the Light incident on them, and refract the rest, is, that some
Rays at their Incidence are in Fits of easy Reflexion, and others in
Fits of easy Transmission._

This may be gather'd from the 24th Observation, where the Light
reflected by thin Plates of Air and Glass, which to the naked Eye
appear'd evenly white all over the Plate, did through a Prism appear
waved with many Successions of Light and Darkness made by alternate Fits
of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission, the Prism severing and
distinguishing the Waves of which the white reflected Light was
composed, as was explain'd above.

And hence Light is in Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission,
before its Incidence on transparent Bodies. And probably it is put into
such fits at its first emission from luminous Bodies, and continues in
them during all its progress. For these Fits are of a lasting nature, as
will appear by the next part of this Book.

In this Proposition I suppose the transparent Bodies to be thick;
because if the thickness of the Body be much less than the Interval of
the Fits of easy Reflexion and Transmission of the Rays, the Body loseth
its reflecting power. For if the Rays, which at their entering into the
Body are put into Fits of easy Transmission, arrive at the farthest
Surface of the Body before they be out of those Fits, they must be
transmitted. And this is the reason why Bubbles of Water lose their
reflecting power when they grow very thin; and why all opake Bodies,
when reduced into very small parts, become transparent.


PROP. XIV.

_Those Surfaces of transparent Bodies, which if the Ray be in a Fit of
Refraction do refract it most strongly, if the Ray be in a Fit of
Reflexion do reflect it most easily._

For we shewed above, in _Prop._ 8. that the cause of Reflexion is not
the impinging of Light on the solid impervious parts of Bodies, but some
other power by which those solid parts act on Light at a distance. We
shewed also in _Prop._ 9. that Bodies reflect and refract Light by one
and the same power, variously exercised in various circumstances; and in
_Prop._ 1. that the most strongly refracting Surfaces reflect the most
Light: All which compared together evince and rarify both this and the
last Proposition.


PROP. XV.

_In any one and the same sort of Rays, emerging in any Angle out of any
refracting Surface into one and the same Medium, the Interval of the
following Fits of easy Reflexion and Transmission are either accurately
or very nearly, as the Rectangle of the Secant of the Angle of
Refraction, and of the Secant of another Angle, whose Sine is the first
of 106 arithmetical mean Proportionals, between the Sines of Incidence
and Refraction, counted from the Sine of Refraction._

This is manifest by the 7th and 19th Observations.


PROP. XVI.

_In several sorts of Rays emerging in equal Angles out of any refracting
Surface into the same Medium, the Intervals of the following Fits of
easy Reflexion and easy Transmission are either accurately, or very
nearly, as the Cube-Roots of the Squares of the lengths of a Chord,
which found the Notes in an Eight_, sol, la, fa, sol, la, mi, fa, sol,
_with all their intermediate degrees answering to the Colours of those
Rays, according to the Analogy described in the seventh Experiment of
the second Part of the first Book._

This is manifest by the 13th and 14th Observations.


PROP. XVII.

_If Rays of any sort pass perpendicularly into several Mediums, the
Intervals of the Fits of easy Reflexion and Transmission in any one
Medium, are to those Intervals in any other, as the Sine of Incidence to
the Sine of Refraction, when the Rays pass out of the first of those two
Mediums into the second._

This is manifest by the 10th Observation.


PROP. XVIII.

_If the Rays which paint the Colour in the Confine of yellow and orange
pass perpendicularly out of any Medium into Air, the Intervals of their
Fits of easy Reflexion are the 1/89000th part of an Inch. And of the
same length are the Intervals of their Fits of easy Transmission._

This is manifest by the 6th Observation. From these Propositions it is
easy to collect the Intervals of the Fits of easy Reflexion and easy
Transmission of any sort of Rays refracted in any angle into any Medium;
and thence to know, whether the Rays shall be reflected or transmitted
at their subsequent Incidence upon any other pellucid Medium. Which
thing, being useful for understanding the next part of this Book, was
here to be set down. And for the same reason I add the two following
Propositions.


PROP. XIX.

_If any sort of Rays falling on the polite Surface of any pellucid
Medium be reflected back, the Fits of easy Reflexion, which they have at
the point of Reflexion, shall still continue to return; and the Returns
shall be at distances from the point of Reflexion in the arithmetical
progression of the Numbers 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, &c. and between these
Fits the Rays shall be in Fits of easy Transmission._

For since the Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission are of a
returning nature, there is no reason why these Fits, which continued
till the Ray arrived at the reflecting Medium, and there inclined the
Ray to Reflexion, should there cease. And if the Ray at the point of
Reflexion was in a Fit of easy Reflexion, the progression of the
distances of these Fits from that point must begin from 0, and so be of
the Numbers 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, &c. And therefore the progression of the
distances of the intermediate Fits of easy Transmission, reckon'd from
the same point, must be in the progression of the odd Numbers 1, 3, 5,
7, 9, &c. contrary to what happens when the Fits are propagated from
points of Refraction.


PROP. XX.

_The Intervals of the Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission,
propagated from points of Reflexion into any Medium, are equal to the
Intervals of the like Fits, which the same Rays would have, if refracted
into the same Medium in Angles of Refraction equal to their Angles of
Reflexion._

For when Light is reflected by the second Surface of thin Plates, it
goes out afterwards freely at the first Surface to make the Rings of
Colours which appear by Reflexion; and, by the freedom of its egress,
makes the Colours of these Rings more vivid and strong than those which
appear on the other side of the Plates by the transmitted Light. The
reflected Rays are therefore in Fits of easy Transmission at their
egress; which would not always happen, if the Intervals of the Fits
within the Plate after Reflexion were not equal, both in length and
number, to their Intervals before it. And this confirms also the
proportions set down in the former Proposition. For if the Rays both in
going in and out at the first Surface be in Fits of easy Transmission,
and the Intervals and Numbers of those Fits between the first and second
Surface, before and after Reflexion, be equal, the distances of the Fits
of easy Transmission from either Surface, must be in the same
progression after Reflexion as before; that is, from the first Surface
which transmitted them in the progression of the even Numbers 0, 2, 4,
6, 8, &c. and from the second which reflected them, in that of the odd
Numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, &c. But these two Propositions will become much more
evident by the Observations in the following part of this Book.




THE

SECOND BOOK

OF

OPTICKS


_PART IV._

_Observations concerning the Reflexions and Colours of thick transparent
polish'd Plates._

There is no Glass or Speculum how well soever polished, but, besides the
Light which it refracts or reflects regularly, scatters every way
irregularly a faint Light, by means of which the polish'd Surface, when
illuminated in a dark room by a beam of the Sun's Light, may be easily
seen in all positions of the Eye. There are certain Phænomena of this
scatter'd Light, which when I first observed them, seem'd very strange
and surprizing to me. My Observations were as follows.

_Obs._ 1. The Sun shining into my darken'd Chamber through a hole one
third of an Inch wide, I let the intromitted beam of Light fall
perpendicularly upon a Glass Speculum ground concave on one side and
convex on the other, to a Sphere of five Feet and eleven Inches Radius,
and Quick-silver'd over on the convex side. And holding a white opake
Chart, or a Quire of Paper at the center of the Spheres to which the
Speculum was ground, that is, at the distance of about five Feet and
eleven Inches from the Speculum, in such manner, that the beam of Light
might pass through a little hole made in the middle of the Chart to the
Speculum, and thence be reflected back to the same hole: I observed upon
the Chart four or five concentric Irises or Rings of Colours, like
Rain-bows, encompassing the hole much after the manner that those, which
in the fourth and following Observations of the first part of this Book
appear'd between the Object-glasses, encompassed the black Spot, but yet
larger and fainter than those. These Rings as they grew larger and
larger became diluter and fainter, so that the fifth was scarce visible.
Yet sometimes, when the Sun shone very clear, there appear'd faint
Lineaments of a sixth and seventh. If the distance of the Chart from the
Speculum was much greater or much less than that of six Feet, the Rings
became dilute and vanish'd. And if the distance of the Speculum from the
Window was much greater than that of six Feet, the reflected beam of
Light would be so broad at the distance of six Feet from the Speculum
where the Rings appear'd, as to obscure one or two of the innermost
Rings. And therefore I usually placed the Speculum at about six Feet
from the Window; so that its Focus might there fall in with the center
of its concavity at the Rings upon the Chart. And this Posture is always
to be understood in the following Observations where no other is
express'd.

_Obs._ 2. The Colours of these Rain-bows succeeded one another from the
center outwards, in the same form and order with those which were made
in the ninth Observation of the first Part of this Book by Light not
reflected, but transmitted through the two Object-glasses. For, first,
there was in their common center a white round Spot of faint Light,
something broader than the reflected beam of Light, which beam sometimes
fell upon the middle of the Spot, and sometimes by a little inclination
of the Speculum receded from the middle, and left the Spot white to the
center.

This white Spot was immediately encompassed with a dark grey or russet,
and that dark grey with the Colours of the first Iris; which Colours on
the inside next the dark grey were a little violet and indigo, and next
to that a blue, which on the outside grew pale, and then succeeded a
little greenish yellow, and after that a brighter yellow, and then on
the outward edge of the Iris a red which on the outside inclined to
purple.

This Iris was immediately encompassed with a second, whose Colours were
in order from the inside outwards, purple, blue, green, yellow, light
red, a red mix'd with purple.

Then immediately follow'd the Colours of the third Iris, which were in
order outwards a green inclining to purple, a good green, and a red more
bright than that of the former Iris.

The fourth and fifth Iris seem'd of a bluish green within, and red
without, but so faintly that it was difficult to discern the Colours.

_Obs._ 3. Measuring the Diameters of these Rings upon the Chart as
accurately as I could, I found them also in the same proportion to one
another with the Rings made by Light transmitted through the two
Object-glasses. For the Diameters of the four first of the bright Rings
measured between the brightest parts of their Orbits, at the distance of
six Feet from the Speculum were 1-11/16, 2-3/8, 2-11/12, 3-3/8 Inches,
whose Squares are in arithmetical progression of the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4.
If the white circular Spot in the middle be reckon'd amongst the Rings,
and its central Light, where it seems to be most luminous, be put
equipollent to an infinitely little Ring; the Squares of the Diameters
of the Rings will be in the progression 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. I measured
also the Diameters of the dark Circles between these luminous ones, and
found their Squares in the progression of the numbers 1/2, 1-1/2, 2-1/2,
3-1/2, &c. the Diameters of the first four at the distance of six Feet
from the Speculum, being 1-3/16, 2-1/16, 2-2/3, 3-3/20 Inches. If the
distance of the Chart from the Speculum was increased or diminished, the
Diameters of the Circles were increased or diminished proportionally.

_Obs._ 4. By the analogy between these Rings and those described in the
Observations of the first Part of this Book, I suspected that there
were many more of them which spread into one another, and by interfering
mix'd their Colours, and diluted one another so that they could not be
seen apart. I viewed them therefore through a Prism, as I did those in
the 24th Observation of the first Part of this Book. And when the Prism
was so placed as by refracting the Light of their mix'd Colours to
separate them, and distinguish the Rings from one another, as it did
those in that Observation, I could then see them distincter than before,
and easily number eight or nine of them, and sometimes twelve or
thirteen. And had not their Light been so very faint, I question not but
that I might have seen many more.

_Obs._ 5. Placing a Prism at the Window to refract the intromitted beam
of Light, and cast the oblong Spectrum of Colours on the Speculum: I
covered the Speculum with a black Paper which had in the middle of it a
hole to let any one of the Colours pass through to the Speculum, whilst
the rest were intercepted by the Paper. And now I found Rings of that
Colour only which fell upon the Speculum. If the Speculum was
illuminated with red, the Rings were totally red with dark Intervals, if
with blue they were totally blue, and so of the other Colours. And when
they were illuminated with any one Colour, the Squares of their
Diameters measured between their most luminous Parts, were in the
arithmetical Progression of the Numbers, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and the Squares
of the Diameters of their dark Intervals in the Progression of the
intermediate Numbers 1/2, 1-1/2, 2-1/2, 3-1/2. But if the Colour was
varied, they varied their Magnitude. In the red they were largest, in
the indigo and violet least, and in the intermediate Colours yellow,
green, and blue, they were of several intermediate Bignesses answering
to the Colour, that is, greater in yellow than in green, and greater in
green than in blue. And hence I knew, that when the Speculum was
illuminated with white Light, the red and yellow on the outside of the
Rings were produced by the least refrangible Rays, and the blue and
violet by the most refrangible, and that the Colours of each Ring spread
into the Colours of the neighbouring Rings on either side, after the
manner explain'd in the first and second Part of this Book, and by
mixing diluted one another so that they could not be distinguish'd,
unless near the Center where they were least mix'd. For in this
Observation I could see the Rings more distinctly, and to a greater
Number than before, being able in the yellow Light to number eight or
nine of them, besides a faint shadow of a tenth. To satisfy my self how
much the Colours of the several Rings spread into one another, I
measured the Diameters of the second and third Rings, and found them
when made by the Confine of the red and orange to be to the same
Diameters when made by the Confine of blue and indigo, as 9 to 8, or
thereabouts. For it was hard to determine this Proportion accurately.
Also the Circles made successively by the red, yellow, and green,
differ'd more from one another than those made successively by the
green, blue, and indigo. For the Circle made by the violet was too dark
to be seen. To carry on the Computation, let us therefore suppose that
the Differences of the Diameters of the Circles made by the outmost red,
the Confine of red and orange, the Confine of orange and yellow, the
Confine of yellow and green, the Confine of green and blue, the Confine
of blue and indigo, the Confine of indigo and violet, and outmost
violet, are in proportion as the Differences of the Lengths of a
Monochord which sound the Tones in an Eight; _sol_, _la_, _fa_, _sol_,
_la_, _mi_, _fa_, _sol_, that is, as the Numbers 1/9, 1/18, 1/12, 1/12,
2/27, 1/27, 1/18. And if the Diameter of the Circle made by the Confine
of red and orange be 9A, and that of the Circle made by the Confine of
blue and indigo be 8A as above; their difference 9A-8A will be to the
difference of the Diameters of the Circles made by the outmost red, and
by the Confine of red and orange, as 1/18 + 1/12 + 1/12 + 2/27 to 1/9,
that is as 8/27 to 1/9, or 8 to 3, and to the difference of the Circles
made by the outmost violet, and by the Confine of blue and indigo, as
1/18 + 1/12 + 1/12 + 2/27 to 1/27 + 1/18, that is, as 8/27 to 5/54, or
as 16 to 5. And therefore these differences will be 3/8A and 5/16A. Add
the first to 9A and subduct the last from 8A, and you will have the
Diameters of the Circles made by the least and most refrangible Rays
75/8A and ((61-1/2)/8)A. These diameters are therefore to one another as
75 to 61-1/2 or 50 to 41, and their Squares as 2500 to 1681, that is, as
3 to 2 very nearly. Which proportion differs not much from the
proportion of the Diameters of the Circles made by the outmost red and
outmost violet, in the 13th Observation of the first part of this Book.

_Obs._ 6. Placing my Eye where these Rings appear'd plainest, I saw the
Speculum tinged all over with Waves of Colours, (red, yellow, green,
blue;) like those which in the Observations of the first part of this
Book appeared between the Object-glasses, and upon Bubbles of Water, but
much larger. And after the manner of those, they were of various
magnitudes in various Positions of the Eye, swelling and shrinking as I
moved my Eye this way and that way. They were formed like Arcs of
concentrick Circles, as those were; and when my Eye was over against the
center of the concavity of the Speculum, (that is, 5 Feet and 10 Inches
distant from the Speculum,) their common center was in a right Line with
that center of concavity, and with the hole in the Window. But in other
postures of my Eye their center had other positions. They appear'd by
the Light of the Clouds propagated to the Speculum through the hole in
the Window; and when the Sun shone through that hole upon the Speculum,
his Light upon it was of the Colour of the Ring whereon it fell, but by
its splendor obscured the Rings made by the Light of the Clouds, unless
when the Speculum was removed to a great distance from the Window, so
that his Light upon it might be broad and faint. By varying the position
of my Eye, and moving it nearer to or farther from the direct beam of
the Sun's Light, the Colour of the Sun's reflected Light constantly
varied upon the Speculum, as it did upon my Eye, the same Colour always
appearing to a Bystander upon my Eye which to me appear'd upon the
Speculum. And thence I knew that the Rings of Colours upon the Chart
were made by these reflected Colours, propagated thither from the
Speculum in several Angles, and that their production depended not upon
the termination of Light and Shadow.

_Obs._ 7. By the Analogy of all these Phænomena with those of the like
Rings of Colours described in the first part of this Book, it seemed to
me that these Colours were produced by this thick Plate of Glass, much
after the manner that those were produced by very thin Plates. For, upon
trial, I found that if the Quick-silver were rubb'd off from the
backside of the Speculum, the Glass alone would cause the same Rings of
Colours, but much more faint than before; and therefore the Phænomenon
depends not upon the Quick-silver, unless so far as the Quick-silver by
increasing the Reflexion of the backside of the Glass increases the
Light of the Rings of Colours. I found also that a Speculum of Metal
without Glass made some Years since for optical uses, and very well
wrought, produced none of those Rings; and thence I understood that
these Rings arise not from one specular Surface alone, but depend upon
the two Surfaces of the Plate of Glass whereof the Speculum was made,
and upon the thickness of the Glass between them. For as in the 7th and
19th Observations of the first part of this Book a thin Plate of Air,
Water, or Glass of an even thickness appeared of one Colour when the
Rays were perpendicular to it, of another when they were a little
oblique, of another when more oblique, of another when still more
oblique, and so on; so here, in the sixth Observation, the Light which
emerged out of the Glass in several Obliquities, made the Glass appear
of several Colours, and being propagated in those Obliquities to the
Chart, there painted Rings of those Colours. And as the reason why a
thin Plate appeared of several Colours in several Obliquities of the
Rays, was, that the Rays of one and the same sort are reflected by the
thin Plate at one obliquity and transmitted at another, and those of
other sorts transmitted where these are reflected, and reflected where
these are transmitted: So the reason why the thick Plate of Glass
whereof the Speculum was made did appear of various Colours in various
Obliquities, and in those Obliquities propagated those Colours to the
Chart, was, that the Rays of one and the same sort did at one Obliquity
emerge out of the Glass, at another did not emerge, but were reflected
back towards the Quick-silver by the hither Surface of the Glass, and
accordingly as the Obliquity became greater and greater, emerged and
were reflected alternately for many Successions; and that in one and the
same Obliquity the Rays of one sort were reflected, and those of another
transmitted. This is manifest by the fifth Observation of this part of
this Book. For in that Observation, when the Speculum was illuminated by
any one of the prismatick Colours, that Light made many Rings of the
same Colour upon the Chart with dark Intervals, and therefore at its
emergence out of the Speculum was alternately transmitted and not
transmitted from the Speculum to the Chart for many Successions,
according to the various Obliquities of its Emergence. And when the
Colour cast on the Speculum by the Prism was varied, the Rings became of
the Colour cast on it, and varied their bigness with their Colour, and
therefore the Light was now alternately transmitted and not transmitted
from the Speculum to the Chart at other Obliquities than before. It
seemed to me therefore that these Rings were of one and the same
original with those of thin Plates, but yet with this difference, that
those of thin Plates are made by the alternate Reflexions and
Transmissions of the Rays at the second Surface of the Plate, after one
passage through it; but here the Rays go twice through the Plate before
they are alternately reflected and transmitted. First, they go through
it from the first Surface to the Quick-silver, and then return through
it from the Quick-silver to the first Surface, and there are either
transmitted to the Chart or reflected back to the Quick-silver,
accordingly as they are in their Fits of easy Reflexion or Transmission
when they arrive at that Surface. For the Intervals of the Fits of the
Rays which fall perpendicularly on the Speculum, and are reflected back
in the same perpendicular Lines, by reason of the equality of these
Angles and Lines, are of the same length and number within the Glass
after Reflexion as before, by the 19th Proposition of the third part of
this Book. And therefore since all the Rays that enter through the
first Surface are in their Fits of easy Transmission at their entrance,
and as many of these as are reflected by the second are in their Fits of
easy Reflexion there, all these must be again in their Fits of easy
Transmission at their return to the first, and by consequence there go
out of the Glass to the Chart, and form upon it the white Spot of Light
in the center of the Rings. For the reason holds good in all sorts of
Rays, and therefore all sorts must go out promiscuously to that Spot,
and by their mixture cause it to be white. But the Intervals of the Fits
of those Rays which are reflected more obliquely than they enter, must
be greater after Reflexion than before, by the 15th and 20th
Propositions. And thence it may happen that the Rays at their return to
the first Surface, may in certain Obliquities be in Fits of easy
Reflexion, and return back to the Quick-silver, and in other
intermediate Obliquities be again in Fits of easy Transmission, and so
go out to the Chart, and paint on it the Rings of Colours about the
white Spot. And because the Intervals of the Fits at equal obliquities
are greater and fewer in the less refrangible Rays, and less and more
numerous in the more refrangible, therefore the less refrangible at
equal obliquities shall make fewer Rings than the more refrangible, and
the Rings made by those shall be larger than the like number of Rings
made by these; that is, the red Rings shall be larger than the yellow,
the yellow than the green, the green than the blue, and the blue than
the violet, as they were really found to be in the fifth Observation.
And therefore the first Ring of all Colours encompassing the white Spot
of Light shall be red without any violet within, and yellow, and green,
and blue in the middle, as it was found in the second Observation; and
these Colours in the second Ring, and those that follow, shall be more
expanded, till they spread into one another, and blend one another by
interfering.

These seem to be the reasons of these Rings in general; and this put me
upon observing the thickness of the Glass, and considering whether the
dimensions and proportions of the Rings may be truly derived from it by
computation.

_Obs._ 8. I measured therefore the thickness of this concavo-convex
Plate of Glass, and found it every where 1/4 of an Inch precisely. Now,
by the sixth Observation of the first Part of this Book, a thin Plate of
Air transmits the brightest Light of the first Ring, that is, the bright
yellow, when its thickness is the 1/89000th part of an Inch; and by the
tenth Observation of the same Part, a thin Plate of Glass transmits the
same Light of the same Ring, when its thickness is less in proportion of
the Sine of Refraction to the Sine of Incidence, that is, when its
thickness is the 11/1513000th or 1/137545th part of an Inch, supposing
the Sines are as 11 to 17. And if this thickness be doubled, it
transmits the same bright Light of the second Ring; if tripled, it
transmits that of the third, and so on; the bright yellow Light in all
these cases being in its Fits of Transmission. And therefore if its
thickness be multiplied 34386 times, so as to become 1/4 of an Inch, it
transmits the same bright Light of the 34386th Ring. Suppose this be the
bright yellow Light transmitted perpendicularly from the reflecting
convex side of the Glass through the concave side to the white Spot in
the center of the Rings of Colours on the Chart: And by a Rule in the
7th and 19th Observations in the first Part of this Book, and by the
15th and 20th Propositions of the third Part of this Book, if the Rays
be made oblique to the Glass, the thickness of the Glass requisite to
transmit the same bright Light of the same Ring in any obliquity, is to
this thickness of 1/4 of an Inch, as the Secant of a certain Angle to
the Radius, the Sine of which Angle is the first of an hundred and six
arithmetical Means between the Sines of Incidence and Refraction,
counted from the Sine of Incidence when the Refraction is made out of
any plated Body into any Medium encompassing it; that is, in this case,
out of Glass into Air. Now if the thickness of the Glass be increased by
degrees, so as to bear to its first thickness, (_viz._ that of a quarter
of an Inch,) the Proportions which 34386 (the number of Fits of the
perpendicular Rays in going through the Glass towards the white Spot in
the center of the Rings,) hath to 34385, 34384, 34383, and 34382, (the
numbers of the Fits of the oblique Rays in going through the Glass
towards the first, second, third, and fourth Rings of Colours,) and if
the first thickness be divided into 100000000 equal parts, the increased
thicknesses will be 100002908, 100005816, 100008725, and 100011633, and
the Angles of which these thicknesses are Secants will be 26´ 13´´, 37´
5´´, 45´ 6´´, and 52´ 26´´, the Radius being 100000000; and the Sines of
these Angles are 762, 1079, 1321, and 1525, and the proportional Sines
of Refraction 1172, 1659, 2031, and 2345, the Radius being 100000. For
since the Sines of Incidence out of Glass into Air are to the Sines of
Refraction as 11 to 17, and to the above-mentioned Secants as 11 to the
first of 106 arithmetical Means between 11 and 17, that is, as 11 to
11-6/106, those Secants will be to the Sines of Refraction as 11-6/106,
to 17, and by this Analogy will give these Sines. So then, if the
obliquities of the Rays to the concave Surface of the Glass be such that
the Sines of their Refraction in passing out of the Glass through that
Surface into the Air be 1172, 1659, 2031, 2345, the bright Light of the
34386th Ring shall emerge at the thicknesses of the Glass, which are to
1/4 of an Inch as 34386 to 34385, 34384, 34383, 34382, respectively. And
therefore, if the thickness in all these Cases be 1/4 of an Inch (as it
is in the Glass of which the Speculum was made) the bright Light of the
34385th Ring shall emerge where the Sine of Refraction is 1172, and that
of the 34384th, 34383th, and 34382th Ring where the Sine is 1659, 2031,
and 2345 respectively. And in these Angles of Refraction the Light of
these Rings shall be propagated from the Speculum to the Chart, and
there paint Rings about the white central round Spot of Light which we
said was the Light of the 34386th Ring. And the Semidiameters of these
Rings shall subtend the Angles of Refraction made at the
Concave-Surface of the Speculum, and by consequence their Diameters
shall be to the distance of the Chart from the Speculum as those Sines
of Refraction doubled are to the Radius, that is, as 1172, 1659, 2031,
and 2345, doubled are to 100000. And therefore, if the distance of the
Chart from the Concave-Surface of the Speculum be six Feet (as it was in
the third of these Observations) the Diameters of the Rings of this
bright yellow Light upon the Chart shall be 1'688, 2'389, 2'925, 3'375
Inches: For these Diameters are to six Feet, as the above-mention'd
Sines doubled are to the Radius. Now, these Diameters of the bright
yellow Rings, thus found by Computation are the very same with those
found in the third of these Observations by measuring them, _viz._ with
1-11/16, 2-3/8, 2-11/12, and 3-3/8 Inches, and therefore the Theory of
deriving these Rings from the thickness of the Plate of Glass of which
the Speculum was made, and from the Obliquity of the emerging Rays
agrees with the Observation. In this Computation I have equalled the
Diameters of the bright Rings made by Light of all Colours, to the
Diameters of the Rings made by the bright yellow. For this yellow makes
the brightest Part of the Rings of all Colours. If you desire the
Diameters of the Rings made by the Light of any other unmix'd Colour,
you may find them readily by putting them to the Diameters of the bright
yellow ones in a subduplicate Proportion of the Intervals of the Fits of
the Rays of those Colours when equally inclined to the refracting or
reflecting Surface which caused those Fits, that is, by putting the
Diameters of the Rings made by the Rays in the Extremities and Limits of
the seven Colours, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet,
proportional to the Cube-roots of the Numbers, 1, 8/9, 5/6, 3/4, 2/3,
3/5, 9/16, 1/2, which express the Lengths of a Monochord sounding the
Notes in an Eighth: For by this means the Diameters of the Rings of
these Colours will be found pretty nearly in the same Proportion to one
another, which they ought to have by the fifth of these Observations.

And thus I satisfy'd my self, that these Rings were of the same kind and
Original with those of thin Plates, and by consequence that the Fits or
alternate Dispositions of the Rays to be reflected and transmitted are
propagated to great distances from every reflecting and refracting
Surface. But yet to put the matter out of doubt, I added the following
Observation.

_Obs._ 9. If these Rings thus depend on the thickness of the Plate of
Glass, their Diameters at equal distances from several Speculums made of
such concavo-convex Plates of Glass as are ground on the same Sphere,
ought to be reciprocally in a subduplicate Proportion of the thicknesses
of the Plates of Glass. And if this Proportion be found true by
experience it will amount to a demonstration that these Rings (like
those formed in thin Plates) do depend on the thickness of the Glass. I
procured therefore another concavo-convex Plate of Glass ground on both
sides to the same Sphere with the former Plate. Its thickness was 5/62
Parts of an Inch; and the Diameters of the three first bright Rings
measured between the brightest Parts of their Orbits at the distance of
six Feet from the Glass were 3·4-1/6·5-1/8· Inches. Now, the thickness
of the other Glass being 1/4 of an Inch was to the thickness of this
Glass as 1/4 to 5/62, that is as 31 to 10, or 310000000 to 100000000,
and the Roots of these Numbers are 17607 and 10000, and in the
Proportion of the first of these Roots to the second are the Diameters
of the bright Rings made in this Observation by the thinner Glass,
3·4-1/6·5-1/8, to the Diameters of the same Rings made in the third of
these Observations by the thicker Glass 1-11/16, 2-3/8. 2-11/12, that
is, the Diameters of the Rings are reciprocally in a subduplicate
Proportion of the thicknesses of the Plates of Glass.

So then in Plates of Glass which are alike concave on one side, and
alike convex on the other side, and alike quick-silver'd on the convex
sides, and differ in nothing but their thickness, the Diameters of the
Rings are reciprocally in a subduplicate Proportion of the thicknesses
of the Plates. And this shews sufficiently that the Rings depend on both
the Surfaces of the Glass. They depend on the convex Surface, because
they are more luminous when that Surface is quick-silver'd over than
when it is without Quick-silver. They depend also upon the concave
Surface, because without that Surface a Speculum makes them not. They
depend on both Surfaces, and on the distances between them, because
their bigness is varied by varying only that distance. And this
dependence is of the same kind with that which the Colours of thin
Plates have on the distance of the Surfaces of those Plates, because the
bigness of the Rings, and their Proportion to one another, and the
variation of their bigness arising from the variation of the thickness
of the Glass, and the Orders of their Colours, is such as ought to
result from the Propositions in the end of the third Part of this Book,
derived from the Phænomena of the Colours of thin Plates set down in the
first Part.

There are yet other Phænomena of these Rings of Colours, but such as
follow from the same Propositions, and therefore confirm both the Truth
of those Propositions, and the Analogy between these Rings and the Rings
of Colours made by very thin Plates. I shall subjoin some of them.

_Obs._ 10. When the beam of the Sun's Light was reflected back from the
Speculum not directly to the hole in the Window, but to a place a little
distant from it, the common center of that Spot, and of all the Rings of
Colours fell in the middle way between the beam of the incident Light,
and the beam of the reflected Light, and by consequence in the center of
the spherical concavity of the Speculum, whenever the Chart on which the
Rings of Colours fell was placed at that center. And as the beam of
reflected Light by inclining the Speculum receded more and more from the
beam of incident Light and from the common center of the colour'd Rings
between them, those Rings grew bigger and bigger, and so also did the
white round Spot, and new Rings of Colours emerged successively out of
their common center, and the white Spot became a white Ring
encompassing them; and the incident and reflected beams of Light always
fell upon the opposite parts of this white Ring, illuminating its
Perimeter like two mock Suns in the opposite parts of an Iris. So then
the Diameter of this Ring, measured from the middle of its Light on one
side to the middle of its Light on the other side, was always equal to
the distance between the middle of the incident beam of Light, and the
middle of the reflected beam measured at the Chart on which the Rings
appeared: And the Rays which form'd this Ring were reflected by the
Speculum in Angles equal to their Angles of Incidence, and by
consequence to their Angles of Refraction at their entrance into the
Glass, but yet their Angles of Reflexion were not in the same Planes
with their Angles of Incidence.

_Obs._ 11. The Colours of the new Rings were in a contrary order to
those of the former, and arose after this manner. The white round Spot
of Light in the middle of the Rings continued white to the center till
the distance of the incident and reflected beams at the Chart was about
7/8 parts of an Inch, and then it began to grow dark in the middle. And
when that distance was about 1-3/16 of an Inch, the white Spot was
become a Ring encompassing a dark round Spot which in the middle
inclined to violet and indigo. And the luminous Rings encompassing it
were grown equal to those dark ones which in the four first Observations
encompassed them, that is to say, the white Spot was grown a white Ring
equal to the first of those dark Rings, and the first of those luminous
Rings was now grown equal to the second of those dark ones, and the
second of those luminous ones to the third of those dark ones, and so
on. For the Diameters of the luminous Rings were now 1-3/16, 2-1/16,
2-2/3, 3-3/20, &c. Inches.

When the distance between the incident and reflected beams of Light
became a little bigger, there emerged out of the middle of the dark Spot
after the indigo a blue, and then out of that blue a pale green, and
soon after a yellow and red. And when the Colour at the center was
brightest, being between yellow and red, the bright Rings were grown
equal to those Rings which in the four first Observations next
encompassed them; that is to say, the white Spot in the middle of those
Rings was now become a white Ring equal to the first of those bright
Rings, and the first of those bright ones was now become equal to the
second of those, and so on. For the Diameters of the white Ring, and of
the other luminous Rings encompassing it, were now 1-11/16, 2-3/8,
2-11/12, 3-3/8, &c. or thereabouts.

When the distance of the two beams of Light at the Chart was a little
more increased, there emerged out of the middle in order after the red,
a purple, a blue, a green, a yellow, and a red inclining much to purple,
and when the Colour was brightest being between yellow and red, the
former indigo, blue, green, yellow and red, were become an Iris or Ring
of Colours equal to the first of those luminous Rings which appeared in
the four first Observations, and the white Ring which was now become
the second of the luminous Rings was grown equal to the second of those,
and the first of those which was now become the third Ring was become
equal to the third of those, and so on. For their Diameters were
1-11/16, 2-3/8, 2-11/12, 3-3/8 Inches, the distance of the two beams of
Light, and the Diameter of the white Ring being 2-3/8 Inches.

When these two beams became more distant there emerged out of the middle
of the purplish red, first a darker round Spot, and then out of the
middle of that Spot a brighter. And now the former Colours (purple,
blue, green, yellow, and purplish red) were become a Ring equal to the
first of the bright Rings mentioned in the four first Observations, and
the Rings about this Ring were grown equal to the Rings about that
respectively; the distance between the two beams of Light and the
Diameter of the white Ring (which was now become the third Ring) being
about 3 Inches.

The Colours of the Rings in the middle began now to grow very dilute,
and if the distance between the two Beams was increased half an Inch, or
an Inch more, they vanish'd whilst the white Ring, with one or two of
the Rings next it on either side, continued still visible. But if the
distance of the two beams of Light was still more increased, these also
vanished: For the Light which coming from several parts of the hole in
the Window fell upon the Speculum in several Angles of Incidence, made
Rings of several bignesses, which diluted and blotted out one another,
as I knew by intercepting some part of that Light. For if I intercepted
that part which was nearest to the Axis of the Speculum the Rings would
be less, if the other part which was remotest from it they would be
bigger.

_Obs._ 12. When the Colours of the Prism were cast successively on the
Speculum, that Ring which in the two last Observations was white, was of
the same bigness in all the Colours, but the Rings without it were
greater in the green than in the blue, and still greater in the yellow,
and greatest in the red. And, on the contrary, the Rings within that
white Circle were less in the green than in the blue, and still less in
the yellow, and least in the red. For the Angles of Reflexion of those
Rays which made this Ring, being equal to their Angles of Incidence, the
Fits of every reflected Ray within the Glass after Reflexion are equal
in length and number to the Fits of the same Ray within the Glass before
its Incidence on the reflecting Surface. And therefore since all the
Rays of all sorts at their entrance into the Glass were in a Fit of
Transmission, they were also in a Fit of Transmission at their returning
to the same Surface after Reflexion; and by consequence were
transmitted, and went out to the white Ring on the Chart. This is the
reason why that Ring was of the same bigness in all the Colours, and why
in a mixture of all it appears white. But in Rays which are reflected in
other Angles, the Intervals of the Fits of the least refrangible being
greatest, make the Rings of their Colour in their progress from this
white Ring, either outwards or inwards, increase or decrease by the
greatest steps; so that the Rings of this Colour without are greatest,
and within least. And this is the reason why in the last Observation,
when the Speculum was illuminated with white Light, the exterior Rings
made by all Colours appeared red without and blue within, and the
interior blue without and red within.

These are the Phænomena of thick convexo-concave Plates of Glass, which
are every where of the same thickness. There are yet other Phænomena
when these Plates are a little thicker on one side than on the other,
and others when the Plates are more or less concave than convex, or
plano-convex, or double-convex. For in all these cases the Plates make
Rings of Colours, but after various manners; all which, so far as I have
yet observed, follow from the Propositions in the end of the third part
of this Book, and so conspire to confirm the truth of those
Propositions. But the Phænomena are too various, and the Calculations
whereby they follow from those Propositions too intricate to be here
prosecuted. I content my self with having prosecuted this kind of
Phænomena so far as to discover their Cause, and by discovering it to
ratify the Propositions in the third Part of this Book.

_Obs._ 13. As Light reflected by a Lens quick-silver'd on the backside
makes the Rings of Colours above described, so it ought to make the like
Rings of Colours in passing through a drop of Water. At the first
Reflexion of the Rays within the drop, some Colours ought to be
transmitted, as in the case of a Lens, and others to be reflected back
to the Eye. For instance, if the Diameter of a small drop or globule of
Water be about the 500th part of an Inch, so that a red-making Ray in
passing through the middle of this globule has 250 Fits of easy
Transmission within the globule, and that all the red-making Rays which
are at a certain distance from this middle Ray round about it have 249
Fits within the globule, and all the like Rays at a certain farther
distance round about it have 248 Fits, and all those at a certain
farther distance 247 Fits, and so on; these concentrick Circles of Rays
after their transmission, falling on a white Paper, will make
concentrick Rings of red upon the Paper, supposing the Light which
passes through one single globule, strong enough to be sensible. And, in
like manner, the Rays of other Colours will make Rings of other Colours.
Suppose now that in a fair Day the Sun shines through a thin Cloud of
such globules of Water or Hail, and that the globules are all of the
same bigness; and the Sun seen through this Cloud shall appear
encompassed with the like concentrick Rings of Colours, and the Diameter
of the first Ring of red shall be 7-1/4 Degrees, that of the second
10-1/4 Degrees, that of the third 12 Degrees 33 Minutes. And accordingly
as the Globules of Water are bigger or less, the Rings shall be less or
bigger. This is the Theory, and Experience answers it. For in _June_
1692, I saw by reflexion in a Vessel of stagnating Water three Halos,
Crowns, or Rings of Colours about the Sun, like three little Rain-bows,
concentrick to his Body. The Colours of the first or innermost Crown
were blue next the Sun, red without, and white in the middle between the
blue and red. Those of the second Crown were purple and blue within, and
pale red without, and green in the middle. And those of the third were
pale blue within, and pale red without; these Crowns enclosed one
another immediately, so that their Colours proceeded in this continual
order from the Sun outward: blue, white, red; purple, blue, green, pale
yellow and red; pale blue, pale red. The Diameter of the second Crown
measured from the middle of the yellow and red on one side of the Sun,
to the middle of the same Colour on the other side was 9-1/3 Degrees, or
thereabouts. The Diameters of the first and third I had not time to
measure, but that of the first seemed to be about five or six Degrees,
and that of the third about twelve. The like Crowns appear sometimes
about the Moon; for in the beginning of the Year 1664, _Febr._ 19th at
Night, I saw two such Crowns about her. The Diameter of the first or
innermost was about three Degrees, and that of the second about five
Degrees and an half. Next about the Moon was a Circle of white, and next
about that the inner Crown, which was of a bluish green within next the
white, and of a yellow and red without, and next about these Colours
were blue and green on the inside of the outward Crown, and red on the
outside of it. At the same time there appear'd a Halo about 22 Degrees
35´ distant from the center of the Moon. It was elliptical, and its long
Diameter was perpendicular to the Horizon, verging below farthest from
the Moon. I am told that the Moon has sometimes three or more
concentrick Crowns of Colours encompassing one another next about her
Body. The more equal the globules of Water or Ice are to one another,
the more Crowns of Colours will appear, and the Colours will be the more
lively. The Halo at the distance of 22-1/2 Degrees from the Moon is of
another sort. By its being oval and remoter from the Moon below than
above, I conclude, that it was made by Refraction in some sort of Hail
or Snow floating in the Air in an horizontal posture, the refracting
Angle being about 58 or 60 Degrees.




THE

THIRD BOOK

OF

OPTICKS


_PART I._

_Observations concerning the Inflexions of the Rays of Light, and the
Colours made thereby._

Grimaldo has inform'd us, that if a beam of the Sun's Light be let into
a dark Room through a very small hole, the Shadows of things in this
Light will be larger than they ought to be if the Rays went on by the
Bodies in straight Lines, and that these Shadows have three parallel
Fringes, Bands or Ranks of colour'd Light adjacent to them. But if the
Hole be enlarged the Fringes grow broad and run into one another, so
that they cannot be distinguish'd. These broad Shadows and Fringes have
been reckon'd by some to proceed from the ordinary refraction of the
Air, but without due examination of the Matter. For the circumstances of
the Phænomenon, so far as I have observed them, are as follows.

_Obs._ 1. I made in a piece of Lead a small Hole with a Pin, whose
breadth was the 42d part of an Inch. For 21 of those Pins laid together
took up the breadth of half an Inch. Through this Hole I let into my
darken'd Chamber a beam of the Sun's Light, and found that the Shadows
of Hairs, Thred, Pins, Straws, and such like slender Substances placed
in this beam of Light, were considerably broader than they ought to be,
if the Rays of Light passed on by these Bodies in right Lines. And
particularly a Hair of a Man's Head, whose breadth was but the 280th
part of an Inch, being held in this Light, at the distance of about
twelve Feet from the Hole, did cast a Shadow which at the distance of
four Inches from the Hair was the sixtieth part of an Inch broad, that
is, above four times broader than the Hair, and at the distance of two
Feet from the Hair was about the eight and twentieth part of an Inch
broad, that is, ten times broader than the Hair, and at the distance of
ten Feet was the eighth part of an Inch broad, that is 35 times broader.

Nor is it material whether the Hair be encompassed with Air, or with any
other pellucid Substance. For I wetted a polish'd Plate of Glass, and
laid the Hair in the Water upon the Glass, and then laying another
polish'd Plate of Glass upon it, so that the Water might fill up the
space between the Glasses, I held them in the aforesaid beam of Light,
so that the Light might pass through them perpendicularly, and the
Shadow of the Hair was at the same distances as big as before. The
Shadows of Scratches made in polish'd Plates of Glass were also much
broader than they ought to be, and the Veins in polish'd Plates of Glass
did also cast the like broad Shadows. And therefore the great breadth of
these Shadows proceeds from some other cause than the Refraction of the
Air.

Let the Circle X [in _Fig._ 1.] represent the middle of the Hair; ADG,
BEH, CFI, three Rays passing by one side of the Hair at several
distances; KNQ, LOR, MPS, three other Rays passing by the other side of
the Hair at the like distances; D, E, F, and N, O, P, the places where
the Rays are bent in their passage by the Hair; G, H, I, and Q, R, S,
the places where the Rays fall on a Paper GQ; IS the breadth of the
Shadow of the Hair cast on the Paper, and TI, VS, two Rays passing to
the Points I and S without bending when the Hair is taken away. And it's
manifest that all the Light between these two Rays TI and VS is bent in
passing by the Hair, and turned aside from the Shadow IS, because if any
part of this Light were not bent it would fall on the Paper within the
Shadow, and there illuminate the Paper, contrary to experience. And
because when the Paper is at a great distance from the Hair, the Shadow
is broad, and therefore the Rays TI and VS are at a great distance from
one another, it follows that the Hair acts upon the Rays of Light at a
good distance in their passing by it. But the Action is strongest on the
Rays which pass by at least distances, and grows weaker and weaker
accordingly as the Rays pass by at distances greater and greater, as is
represented in the Scheme: For thence it comes to pass, that the Shadow
of the Hair is much broader in proportion to the distance of the Paper
from the Hair, when the Paper is nearer the Hair, than when it is at a
great distance from it.

_Obs._ 2. The Shadows of all Bodies (Metals, Stones, Glass, Wood, Horn,
Ice, &c.) in this Light were border'd with three Parallel Fringes or
Bands of colour'd Light, whereof that which was contiguous to the Shadow
was broadest and most luminous, and that which was remotest from it was
narrowest, and so faint, as not easily to be visible. It was difficult
to distinguish the Colours, unless when the Light fell very obliquely
upon a smooth Paper, or some other smooth white Body, so as to make them
appear much broader than they would otherwise do. And then the Colours
were plainly visible in this Order: The first or innermost Fringe was
violet and deep blue next the Shadow, and then light blue, green, and
yellow in the middle, and red without. The second Fringe was almost
contiguous to the first, and the third to the second, and both were blue
within, and yellow and red without, but their Colours were very faint,
especially those of the third. The Colours therefore proceeded in this
order from the Shadow; violet, indigo, pale blue, green, yellow, red;
blue, yellow, red; pale blue, pale yellow and red. The Shadows made by
Scratches and Bubbles in polish'd Plates of Glass were border'd with the
like Fringes of colour'd Light. And if Plates of Looking-glass sloop'd
off near the edges with a Diamond-cut, be held in the same beam of
Light, the Light which passes through the parallel Planes of the Glass
will be border'd with the like Fringes of Colours where those Planes
meet with the Diamond-cut, and by this means there will sometimes appear
four or five Fringes of Colours. Let AB, CD [in _Fig._ 2.] represent the
parallel Planes of a Looking-glass, and BD the Plane of the Diamond-cut,
making at B a very obtuse Angle with the Plane AB. And let all the Light
between the Rays ENI and FBM pass directly through the parallel Planes
of the Glass, and fall upon the Paper between I and M, and all the Light
between the Rays GO and HD be refracted by the oblique Plane of the
Diamond-cut BD, and fall upon the Paper between K and L; and the Light
which passes directly through the parallel Planes of the Glass, and
falls upon the Paper between I and M, will be border'd with three or
more Fringes at M.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

So by looking on the Sun through a Feather or black Ribband held close
to the Eye, several Rain-bows will appear; the Shadows which the Fibres
or Threds cast on the _Tunica Retina_, being border'd with the like
Fringes of Colours.

_Obs._ 3. When the Hair was twelve Feet distant from this Hole, and its
Shadow fell obliquely upon a flat white Scale of Inches and Parts of an
Inch placed half a Foot beyond it, and also when the Shadow fell
perpendicularly upon the same Scale placed nine Feet beyond it; I
measured the breadth of the Shadow and Fringes as accurately as I could,
and found them in Parts of an Inch as follows.

-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
                                           |  half a   | Nine
                      At the Distance of   |   Foot    |  Feet
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth of the Shadow                  |   1/54    |  1/9
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth between the Middles of the     |   1/38    |
  brightest Light of the innermost Fringes |    or     |
  on either side the Shadow                |   1/39    |  7/50
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth between the Middles of the     |           |
  brightest Light of the middlemost Fringes|           |
  on either side the Shadow                | 1/23-1/2  |  4/17
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth between the Middles of the     |  1/18     |
  brightest Light of the outmost Fringes   |   or      |
  on either side the Shadow                | 1/18-1/2  |  3/10
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The distance between the Middles of the    |           |
  brightest Light of the first and second  |           |
  Fringes                                  |  1/120    |  1/21
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The distance between the Middles of the    |           |
  brightest Light of the second and third  |           |
  Fringes                                  |  1/170    |  1/31
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth of the luminous Part (green,   |           |
  white, yellow, and red) of the first     |           |
  Fringe                                   |  1/170    |  1/32
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth of the darker Space between    |           |
  the first and second Fringes             |  1/240    |  1/45
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth of the luminous Part of the    |           |
  second Fringe                            |  1/290    |  1/55
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth of the darker Space between    |           |
  the second and third Fringes             |  1/340    |  1/63
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------

These Measures I took by letting the Shadow of the Hair, at half a Foot
distance, fall so obliquely on the Scale, as to appear twelve times
broader than when it fell perpendicularly on it at the same distance,
and setting down in this Table the twelfth part of the Measures I then
took.

_Obs._ 4. When the Shadow and Fringes were cast obliquely upon a smooth
white Body, and that Body was removed farther and farther from the Hair,
the first Fringe began to appear and look brighter than the rest of the
Light at the distance of less than a quarter of an Inch from the Hair,
and the dark Line or Shadow between that and the second Fringe began to
appear at a less distance from the Hair than that of the third part of
an Inch. The second Fringe began to appear at a distance from the Hair
of less than half an Inch, and the Shadow between that and the third
Fringe at a distance less than an inch, and the third Fringe at a
distance less than three Inches. At greater distances they became much
more sensible, but kept very nearly the same proportion of their
breadths and intervals which they had at their first appearing. For the
distance between the middle of the first, and middle of the second
Fringe, was to the distance between the middle of the second and middle
of the third Fringe, as three to two, or ten to seven. And the last of
these two distances was equal to the breadth of the bright Light or
luminous part of the first Fringe. And this breadth was to the breadth
of the bright Light of the second Fringe as seven to four, and to the
dark Interval of the first and second Fringe as three to two, and to
the like dark Interval between the second and third as two to one. For
the breadths of the Fringes seem'd to be in the progression of the
Numbers 1, sqrt(1/3), sqrt(1/5), and their Intervals to be in the
same progression with them; that is, the Fringes and their Intervals
together to be in the continual progression of the Numbers 1,
sqrt(1/2), sqrt(1/3), sqrt(1/4), sqrt(1/5), or thereabouts. And
these Proportions held the same very nearly at all distances from the
Hair; the dark Intervals of the Fringes being as broad in proportion to
the breadth of the Fringes at their first appearance as afterwards at
great distances from the Hair, though not so dark and distinct.

_Obs._ 5. The Sun shining into my darken'd Chamber through a hole a
quarter of an Inch broad, I placed at the distance of two or three Feet
from the Hole a Sheet of Pasteboard, which was black'd all over on both
sides, and in the middle of it had a hole about three quarters of an
Inch square for the Light to pass through. And behind the hole I
fasten'd to the Pasteboard with Pitch the blade of a sharp Knife, to
intercept some part of the Light which passed through the hole. The
Planes of the Pasteboard and blade of the Knife were parallel to one
another, and perpendicular to the Rays. And when they were so placed
that none of the Sun's Light fell on the Pasteboard, but all of it
passed through the hole to the Knife, and there part of it fell upon the
blade of the Knife, and part of it passed by its edge; I let this part
of the Light which passed by, fall on a white Paper two or three Feet
beyond the Knife, and there saw two streams of faint Light shoot out
both ways from the beam of Light into the shadow, like the Tails of
Comets. But because the Sun's direct Light by its brightness upon the
Paper obscured these faint streams, so that I could scarce see them, I
made a little hole in the midst of the Paper for that Light to pass
through and fall on a black Cloth behind it; and then I saw the two
streams plainly. They were like one another, and pretty nearly equal in
length, and breadth, and quantity of Light. Their Light at that end next
the Sun's direct Light was pretty strong for the space of about a
quarter of an Inch, or half an Inch, and in all its progress from that
direct Light decreased gradually till it became insensible. The whole
length of either of these streams measured upon the paper at the
distance of three Feet from the Knife was about six or eight Inches; so
that it subtended an Angle at the edge of the Knife of about 10 or 12,
or at most 14 Degrees. Yet sometimes I thought I saw it shoot three or
four Degrees farther, but with a Light so very faint that I could scarce
perceive it, and suspected it might (in some measure at least) arise
from some other cause than the two streams did. For placing my Eye in
that Light beyond the end of that stream which was behind the Knife, and
looking towards the Knife, I could see a line of Light upon its edge,
and that not only when my Eye was in the line of the Streams, but also
when it was without that line either towards the point of the Knife, or
towards the handle. This line of Light appear'd contiguous to the edge
of the Knife, and was narrower than the Light of the innermost Fringe,
and narrowest when my Eye was farthest from the direct Light, and
therefore seem'd to pass between the Light of that Fringe and the edge
of the Knife, and that which passed nearest the edge to be most bent,
though not all of it.

_Obs._ 6. I placed another Knife by this, so that their edges might be
parallel, and look towards one another, and that the beam of Light might
fall upon both the Knives, and some part of it pass between their edges.
And when the distance of their edges was about the 400th part of an
Inch, the stream parted in the middle, and left a Shadow between the two
parts. This Shadow was so black and dark that all the Light which passed
between the Knives seem'd to be bent, and turn'd aside to the one hand
or to the other. And as the Knives still approach'd one another the
Shadow grew broader, and the streams shorter at their inward ends which
were next the Shadow, until upon the contact of the Knives the whole
Light vanish'd, leaving its place to the Shadow.

And hence I gather that the Light which is least bent, and goes to the
inward ends of the streams, passes by the edges of the Knives at the
greatest distance, and this distance when the Shadow begins to appear
between the streams, is about the 800th part of an Inch. And the Light
which passes by the edges of the Knives at distances still less and
less, is more and more bent, and goes to those parts of the streams
which are farther and farther from the direct Light; because when the
Knives approach one another till they touch, those parts of the streams
vanish last which are farthest from the direct Light.

_Obs._ 7. In the fifth Observation the Fringes did not appear, but by
reason of the breadth of the hole in the Window became so broad as to
run into one another, and by joining, to make one continued Light in the
beginning of the streams. But in the sixth, as the Knives approached one
another, a little before the Shadow appeared between the two streams,
the Fringes began to appear on the inner ends of the Streams on either
side of the direct Light; three on one side made by the edge of one
Knife, and three on the other side made by the edge of the other Knife.
They were distinctest when the Knives were placed at the greatest
distance from the hole in the Window, and still became more distinct by
making the hole less, insomuch that I could sometimes see a faint
lineament of a fourth Fringe beyond the three above mention'd. And as
the Knives continually approach'd one another, the Fringes grew
distincter and larger, until they vanish'd. The outmost Fringe vanish'd
first, and the middlemost next, and the innermost last. And after they
were all vanish'd, and the line of Light which was in the middle between
them was grown very broad, enlarging it self on both sides into the
streams of Light described in the fifth Observation, the above-mention'd
Shadow began to appear in the middle of this line, and divide it along
the middle into two lines of Light, and increased until the whole Light
vanish'd. This enlargement of the Fringes was so great that the Rays
which go to the innermost Fringe seem'd to be bent above twenty times
more when this Fringe was ready to vanish, than when one of the Knives
was taken away.

And from this and the former Observation compared, I gather, that the
Light of the first Fringe passed by the edge of the Knife at a distance
greater than the 800th part of an Inch, and the Light of the second
Fringe passed by the edge of the Knife at a greater distance than the
Light of the first Fringe did, and that of the third at a greater
distance than that of the second, and that of the streams of Light
described in the fifth and sixth Observations passed by the edges of the
Knives at less distances than that of any of the Fringes.

_Obs._ 8. I caused the edges of two Knives to be ground truly strait,
and pricking their points into a Board so that their edges might look
towards one another, and meeting near their points contain a rectilinear
Angle, I fasten'd their Handles together with Pitch to make this Angle
invariable. The distance of the edges of the Knives from one another at
the distance of four Inches from the angular Point, where the edges of
the Knives met, was the eighth part of an Inch; and therefore the Angle
contain'd by the edges was about one Degree 54: The Knives thus fix'd
together I placed in a beam of the Sun's Light, let into my darken'd
Chamber through a Hole the 42d Part of an Inch wide, at the distance of
10 or 15 Feet from the Hole, and let the Light which passed between
their edges fall very obliquely upon a smooth white Ruler at the
distance of half an Inch, or an Inch from the Knives, and there saw the
Fringes by the two edges of the Knives run along the edges of the
Shadows of the Knives in Lines parallel to those edges without growing
sensibly broader, till they met in Angles equal to the Angle contained
by the edges of the Knives, and where they met and joined they ended
without crossing one another. But if the Ruler was held at a much
greater distance from the Knives, the Fringes where they were farther
from the Place of their Meeting, were a little narrower, and became
something broader and broader as they approach'd nearer and nearer to
one another, and after they met they cross'd one another, and then
became much broader than before.

Whence I gather that the distances at which the Fringes pass by the
Knives are not increased nor alter'd by the approach of the Knives, but
the Angles in which the Rays are there bent are much increased by that
approach; and that the Knife which is nearest any Ray determines which
way the Ray shall be bent, and the other Knife increases the bent.

_Obs._ 9. When the Rays fell very obliquely upon the Ruler at the
distance of the third Part of an Inch from the Knives, the dark Line
between the first and second Fringe of the Shadow of one Knife, and the
dark Line between the first and second Fringe of the Shadow of the other
knife met with one another, at the distance of the fifth Part of an Inch
from the end of the Light which passed between the Knives at the
concourse of their edges. And therefore the distance of the edges of the
Knives at the meeting of these dark Lines was the 160th Part of an Inch.
For as four Inches to the eighth Part of an Inch, so is any Length of
the edges of the Knives measured from the point of their concourse to
the distance of the edges of the Knives at the end of that Length, and
so is the fifth Part of an Inch to the 160th Part. So then the dark
Lines above-mention'd meet in the middle of the Light which passes
between the Knives where they are distant the 160th Part of an Inch, and
the one half of that Light passes by the edge of one Knife at a distance
not greater than the 320th Part of an Inch, and falling upon the Paper
makes the Fringes of the Shadow of that Knife, and the other half passes
by the edge of the other Knife, at a distance not greater than the 320th
Part of an Inch, and falling upon the Paper makes the Fringes of the
Shadow of the other Knife. But if the Paper be held at a distance from
the Knives greater than the third Part of an Inch, the dark Lines
above-mention'd meet at a greater distance than the fifth Part of an
Inch from the end of the Light which passed between the Knives at the
concourse of their edges; and therefore the Light which falls upon the
Paper where those dark Lines meet passes between the Knives where the
edges are distant above the 160th part of an Inch.

For at another time, when the two Knives were distant eight Feet and
five Inches from the little hole in the Window, made with a small Pin as
above, the Light which fell upon the Paper where the aforesaid dark
lines met, passed between the Knives, where the distance between their
edges was as in the following Table, when the distance of the Paper from
the Knives was also as follows.

-----------------------------+------------------------------
                             | Distances between the edges
 Distances of the Paper      |  of the Knives in millesimal
 from the Knives in Inches.  |      parts of an Inch.
-----------------------------+------------------------------
          1-1/2.             |             0'012
          3-1/3.             |             0'020
          8-3/5.             |             0'034
         32.                 |             0'057
         96.                 |             0'081
        131.                 |             0'087
_____________________________|______________________________

And hence I gather, that the Light which makes the Fringes upon the
Paper is not the same Light at all distances of the Paper from the
Knives, but when the Paper is held near the Knives, the Fringes are made
by Light which passes by the edges of the Knives at a less distance, and
is more bent than when the Paper is held at a greater distance from the
Knives.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

_Obs._ 10. When the Fringes of the Shadows of the Knives fell
perpendicularly upon a Paper at a great distance from the Knives, they
were in the form of Hyperbola's, and their Dimensions were as follows.
Let CA, CB [in _Fig._ 3.] represent Lines drawn upon the Paper parallel
to the edges of the Knives, and between which all the Light would fall,
if it passed between the edges of the Knives without inflexion; DE a
Right Line drawn through C making the Angles ACD, BCE, equal to one
another, and terminating all the Light which falls upon the Paper from
the point where the edges of the Knives meet; _eis_, _fkt_, and _glv_,
three hyperbolical Lines representing the Terminus of the Shadow of one
of the Knives, the dark Line between the first and second Fringes of
that Shadow, and the dark Line between the second and third Fringes of
the same Shadow; _xip_, _ykq_, and _zlr_, three other hyperbolical Lines
representing the Terminus of the Shadow of the other Knife, the dark
Line between the first and second Fringes of that Shadow, and the dark
line between the second and third Fringes of the same Shadow. And
conceive that these three Hyperbola's are like and equal to the former
three, and cross them in the points _i_, _k_, and _l_, and that the
Shadows of the Knives are terminated and distinguish'd from the first
luminous Fringes by the lines _eis_ and _xip_, until the meeting and
crossing of the Fringes, and then those lines cross the Fringes in the
form of dark lines, terminating the first luminous Fringes within side,
and distinguishing them from another Light which begins to appear at
_i_, and illuminates all the triangular space _ip_DE_s_ comprehended by
these dark lines, and the right line DE. Of these Hyperbola's one
Asymptote is the line DE, and their other Asymptotes are parallel to the
lines CA and CB. Let _rv_ represent a line drawn any where upon the
Paper parallel to the Asymptote DE, and let this line cross the right
lines AC in _m_, and BC in _n_, and the six dark hyperbolical lines in
_p_, _q_, _r_; _s_, _t_, _v_; and by measuring the distances _ps_, _qt_,
_rv_, and thence collecting the lengths of the Ordinates _np_, _nq_,
_nr_ or _ms_, _mt_, _mv_, and doing this at several distances of the
line _rv_ from the Asymptote DD, you may find as many points of these
Hyperbola's as you please, and thereby know that these curve lines are
Hyperbola's differing little from the conical Hyperbola. And by
measuring the lines C_i_, C_k_, C_l_, you may find other points of these
Curves.

For instance; when the Knives were distant from the hole in the Window
ten Feet, and the Paper from the Knives nine Feet, and the Angle
contained by the edges of the Knives to which the Angle ACB is equal,
was subtended by a Chord which was to the Radius as 1 to 32, and the
distance of the line _rv_ from the Asymptote DE was half an Inch: I
measured the lines _ps_, _qt_, _rv_, and found them 0'35, 0'65, 0'98
Inches respectively; and by adding to their halfs the line 1/2 _mn_,
(which here was the 128th part of an Inch, or 0'0078 Inches,) the Sums
_np_, _nq_, _nr_, were 0'1828, 0'3328, 0'4978 Inches. I measured also
the distances of the brightest parts of the Fringes which run between
_pq_ and _st_, _qr_ and _tv_, and next beyond _r_ and _v_, and found
them 0'5, 0'8, and 1'17 Inches.

_Obs._ 11. The Sun shining into my darken'd Room through a small round
hole made in a Plate of Lead with a slender Pin, as above; I placed at
the hole a Prism to refract the Light, and form on the opposite Wall the
Spectrum of Colours, described in the third Experiment of the first
Book. And then I found that the Shadows of all Bodies held in the
colour'd Light between the Prism and the Wall, were border'd with
Fringes of the Colour of that Light in which they were held. In the full
red Light they were totally red without any sensible blue or violet, and
in the deep blue Light they were totally blue without any sensible red
or yellow; and so in the green Light they were totally green, excepting
a little yellow and blue, which were mixed in the green Light of the
Prism. And comparing the Fringes made in the several colour'd Lights, I
found that those made in the red Light were largest, those made in the
violet were least, and those made in the green were of a middle bigness.
For the Fringes with which the Shadow of a Man's Hair were bordered,
being measured cross the Shadow at the distance of six Inches from the
Hair, the distance between the middle and most luminous part of the
first or innermost Fringe on one side of the Shadow, and that of the
like Fringe on the other side of the Shadow, was in the full red Light
1/37-1/4 of an Inch, and in the full violet 7/46. And the like distance
between the middle and most luminous parts of the second Fringes on
either side the Shadow was in the full red Light 1/22, and in the violet
1/27 of an Inch. And these distances of the Fringes held the same
proportion at all distances from the Hair without any sensible
variation.

So then the Rays which made these Fringes in the red Light passed by the
Hair at a greater distance than those did which made the like Fringes in
the violet; and therefore the Hair in causing these Fringes acted alike
upon the red Light or least refrangible Rays at a greater distance, and
upon the violet or most refrangible Rays at a less distance, and by
those actions disposed the red Light into Larger Fringes, and the violet
into smaller, and the Lights of intermediate Colours into Fringes of
intermediate bignesses without changing the Colour of any sort of Light.

When therefore the Hair in the first and second of these Observations
was held in the white beam of the Sun's Light, and cast a Shadow which
was border'd with three Fringes of coloured Light, those Colours arose
not from any new modifications impress'd upon the Rays of Light by the
Hair, but only from the various inflexions whereby the several Sorts of
Rays were separated from one another, which before separation, by the
mixture of all their Colours, composed the white beam of the Sun's
Light, but whenever separated compose Lights of the several Colours
which they are originally disposed to exhibit. In this 11th Observation,
where the Colours are separated before the Light passes by the Hair, the
least refrangible Rays, which when separated from the rest make red,
were inflected at a greater distance from the Hair, so as to make three
red Fringes at a greater distance from the middle of the Shadow of the
Hair; and the most refrangible Rays which when separated make violet,
were inflected at a less distance from the Hair, so as to make three
violet Fringes at a less distance from the middle of the Shadow of the
Hair. And other Rays of intermediate degrees of Refrangibility were
inflected at intermediate distances from the Hair, so as to make Fringes
of intermediate Colours at intermediate distances from the middle of the
Shadow of the Hair. And in the second Observation, where all the Colours
are mix'd in the white Light which passes by the Hair, these Colours are
separated by the various inflexions of the Rays, and the Fringes which
they make appear all together, and the innermost Fringes being
contiguous make one broad Fringe composed of all the Colours in due
order, the violet lying on the inside of the Fringe next the Shadow, the
red on the outside farthest from the Shadow, and the blue, green, and
yellow, in the middle. And, in like manner, the middlemost Fringes of
all the Colours lying in order, and being contiguous, make another broad
Fringe composed of all the Colours; and the outmost Fringes of all the
Colours lying in order, and being contiguous, make a third broad Fringe
composed of all the Colours. These are the three Fringes of colour'd
Light with which the Shadows of all Bodies are border'd in the second
Observation.

When I made the foregoing Observations, I design'd to repeat most of
them with more care and exactness, and to make some new ones for
determining the manner how the Rays of Light are bent in their passage
by Bodies, for making the Fringes of Colours with the dark lines between
them. But I was then interrupted, and cannot now think of taking these
things into farther Consideration. And since I have not finish'd this
part of my Design, I shall conclude with proposing only some Queries, in
order to a farther search to be made by others.

_Query_ 1. Do not Bodies act upon Light at a distance, and by their
action bend its Rays; and is not this action (_cæteris paribus_)
strongest at the least distance?

_Qu._ 2. Do not the Rays which differ in Refrangibility differ also in
Flexibity; and are they not by their different Inflexions separated from
one another, so as after separation to make the Colours in the three
Fringes above described? And after what manner are they inflected to
make those Fringes?

_Qu._ 3. Are not the Rays of Light in passing by the edges and sides of
Bodies, bent several times backwards and forwards, with a motion like
that of an Eel? And do not the three Fringes of colour'd Light
above-mention'd arise from three such bendings?

_Qu._ 4. Do not the Rays of Light which fall upon Bodies, and are
reflected or refracted, begin to bend before they arrive at the Bodies;
and are they not reflected, refracted, and inflected, by one and the
same Principle, acting variously in various Circumstances?

_Qu._ 5. Do not Bodies and Light act mutually upon one another; that is
to say, Bodies upon Light in emitting, reflecting, refracting and
inflecting it, and Light upon Bodies for heating them, and putting their
parts into a vibrating motion wherein heat consists?

_Qu._ 6. Do not black Bodies conceive heat more easily from Light than
those of other Colours do, by reason that the Light falling on them is
not reflected outwards, but enters the Bodies, and is often reflected
and refracted within them, until it be stifled and lost?

_Qu._ 7. Is not the strength and vigor of the action between Light and
sulphureous Bodies observed above, one reason why sulphureous Bodies
take fire more readily, and burn more vehemently than other Bodies do?

_Qu._ 8. Do not all fix'd Bodies, when heated beyond a certain degree,
emit Light and shine; and is not this Emission perform'd by the
vibrating motions of their parts? And do not all Bodies which abound
with terrestrial parts, and especially with sulphureous ones, emit Light
as often as those parts are sufficiently agitated; whether that
agitation be made by Heat, or by Friction, or Percussion, or
Putrefaction, or by any vital Motion, or any other Cause? As for
instance; Sea-Water in a raging Storm; Quick-silver agitated in _vacuo_;
the Back of a Cat, or Neck of a Horse, obliquely struck or rubbed in a
dark place; Wood, Flesh and Fish while they putrefy; Vapours arising
from putrefy'd Waters, usually call'd _Ignes Fatui_; Stacks of moist Hay
or Corn growing hot by fermentation; Glow-worms and the Eyes of some
Animals by vital Motions; the vulgar _Phosphorus_ agitated by the
attrition of any Body, or by the acid Particles of the Air; Amber and
some Diamonds by striking, pressing or rubbing them; Scrapings of Steel
struck off with a Flint; Iron hammer'd very nimbly till it become so hot
as to kindle Sulphur thrown upon it; the Axletrees of Chariots taking
fire by the rapid rotation of the Wheels; and some Liquors mix'd with
one another whose Particles come together with an Impetus, as Oil of
Vitriol distilled from its weight of Nitre, and then mix'd with twice
its weight of Oil of Anniseeds. So also a Globe of Glass about 8 or 10
Inches in diameter, being put into a Frame where it may be swiftly
turn'd round its Axis, will in turning shine where it rubs against the
palm of ones Hand apply'd to it: And if at the same time a piece of
white Paper or white Cloth, or the end of ones Finger be held at the
distance of about a quarter of an Inch or half an Inch from that part of
the Glass where it is most in motion, the electrick Vapour which is
excited by the friction of the Glass against the Hand, will by dashing
against the white Paper, Cloth or Finger, be put into such an agitation
as to emit Light, and make the white Paper, Cloth or Finger, appear
lucid like a Glowworm; and in rushing out of the Glass will sometimes
push against the finger so as to be felt. And the same things have been
found by rubbing a long and large Cylinder or Glass or Amber with a
Paper held in ones hand, and continuing the friction till the Glass grew
warm.

_Qu._ 9. Is not Fire a Body heated so hot as to emit Light copiously?
For what else is a red hot Iron than Fire? And what else is a burning
Coal than red hot Wood?

_Qu._ 10. Is not Flame a Vapour, Fume or Exhalation heated red hot, that
is, so hot as to shine? For Bodies do not flame without emitting a
copious Fume, and this Fume burns in the Flame. The _Ignis Fatuus_ is a
Vapour shining without heat, and is there not the same difference
between this Vapour and Flame, as between rotten Wood shining without
heat and burning Coals of Fire? In distilling hot Spirits, if the Head
of the Still be taken off, the Vapour which ascends out of the Still
will take fire at the Flame of a Candle, and turn into Flame, and the
Flame will run along the Vapour from the Candle to the Still. Some
Bodies heated by Motion, or Fermentation, if the heat grow intense, fume
copiously, and if the heat be great enough the Fumes will shine and
become Flame. Metals in fusion do not flame for want of a copious Fume,
except Spelter, which fumes copiously, and thereby flames. All flaming
Bodies, as Oil, Tallow, Wax, Wood, fossil Coals, Pitch, Sulphur, by
flaming waste and vanish into burning Smoke, which Smoke, if the Flame
be put out, is very thick and visible, and sometimes smells strongly,
but in the Flame loses its smell by burning, and according to the nature
of the Smoke the Flame is of several Colours, as that of Sulphur blue,
that of Copper open'd with sublimate green, that of Tallow yellow, that
of Camphire white. Smoke passing through Flame cannot but grow red hot,
and red hot Smoke can have no other appearance than that of Flame. When
Gun-powder takes fire, it goes away into Flaming Smoke. For the Charcoal
and Sulphur easily take fire, and set fire to the Nitre, and the Spirit
of the Nitre being thereby rarified into Vapour, rushes out with
Explosion much after the manner that the Vapour of Water rushes out of
an Æolipile; the Sulphur also being volatile is converted into Vapour,
and augments the Explosion. And the acid Vapour of the Sulphur (namely
that which distils under a Bell into Oil of Sulphur,) entring violently
into the fix'd Body of the Nitre, sets loose the Spirit of the Nitre,
and excites a great Fermentation, whereby the Heat is farther augmented,
and the fix'd Body of the Nitre is also rarified into Fume, and the
Explosion is thereby made more vehement and quick. For if Salt of Tartar
be mix'd with Gun-powder, and that Mixture be warm'd till it takes fire,
the Explosion will be more violent and quick than that of Gun-powder
alone; which cannot proceed from any other cause than the action of the
Vapour of the Gun-powder upon the Salt of Tartar, whereby that Salt is
rarified. The Explosion of Gun-powder arises therefore from the violent
action whereby all the Mixture being quickly and vehemently heated, is
rarified and converted into Fume and Vapour: which Vapour, by the
violence of that action, becoming so hot as to shine, appears in the
form of Flame.

_Qu._ 11. Do not great Bodies conserve their heat the longest, their
parts heating one another, and may not great dense and fix'd Bodies,
when heated beyond a certain degree, emit Light so copiously, as by the
Emission and Re-action of its Light, and the Reflexions and Refractions
of its Rays within its Pores to grow still hotter, till it comes to a
certain period of heat, such as is that of the Sun? And are not the Sun
and fix'd Stars great Earths vehemently hot, whose heat is conserved by
the greatness of the Bodies, and the mutual Action and Reaction between
them, and the Light which they emit, and whose parts are kept from
fuming away, not only by their fixity, but also by the vast weight and
density of the Atmospheres incumbent upon them; and very strongly
compressing them, and condensing the Vapours and Exhalations which arise
from them? For if Water be made warm in any pellucid Vessel emptied of
Air, that Water in the _Vacuum_ will bubble and boil as vehemently as it
would in the open Air in a Vessel set upon the Fire till it conceives a
much greater heat. For the weight of the incumbent Atmosphere keeps down
the Vapours, and hinders the Water from boiling, until it grow much
hotter than is requisite to make it boil _in vacuo_. Also a mixture of
Tin and Lead being put upon a red hot Iron _in vacuo_ emits a Fume and
Flame, but the same Mixture in the open Air, by reason of the incumbent
Atmosphere, does not so much as emit any Fume which can be perceived by
Sight. In like manner the great weight of the Atmosphere which lies upon
the Globe of the Sun may hinder Bodies there from rising up and going
away from the Sun in the form of Vapours and Fumes, unless by means of a
far greater heat than that which on the Surface of our Earth would very
easily turn them into Vapours and Fumes. And the same great weight may
condense those Vapours and Exhalations as soon as they shall at any time
begin to ascend from the Sun, and make them presently fall back again
into him, and by that action increase his Heat much after the manner
that in our Earth the Air increases the Heat of a culinary Fire. And the
same weight may hinder the Globe of the Sun from being diminish'd,
unless by the Emission of Light, and a very small quantity of Vapours
and Exhalations.

_Qu._ 12. Do not the Rays of Light in falling upon the bottom of the Eye
excite Vibrations in the _Tunica Retina_? Which Vibrations, being
propagated along the solid Fibres of the optick Nerves into the Brain,
cause the Sense of seeing. For because dense Bodies conserve their Heat
a long time, and the densest Bodies conserve their Heat the longest, the
Vibrations of their parts are of a lasting nature, and therefore may be
propagated along solid Fibres of uniform dense Matter to a great
distance, for conveying into the Brain the impressions made upon all the
Organs of Sense. For that Motion which can continue long in one and the
same part of a Body, can be propagated a long way from one part to
another, supposing the Body homogeneal, so that the Motion may not be
reflected, refracted, interrupted or disorder'd by any unevenness of the
Body.

_Qu._ 13. Do not several sorts of Rays make Vibrations of several
bignesses, which according to their bignesses excite Sensations of
several Colours, much after the manner that the Vibrations of the Air,
according to their several bignesses excite Sensations of several
Sounds? And particularly do not the most refrangible Rays excite the
shortest Vibrations for making a Sensation of deep violet, the least
refrangible the largest for making a Sensation of deep red, and the
several intermediate sorts of Rays, Vibrations of several intermediate
bignesses to make Sensations of the several intermediate Colours?

_Qu._ 14. May not the harmony and discord of Colours arise from the
proportions of the Vibrations propagated through the Fibres of the
optick Nerves into the Brain, as the harmony and discord of Sounds arise
from the proportions of the Vibrations of the Air? For some Colours, if
they be view'd together, are agreeable to one another, as those of Gold
and Indigo, and others disagree.

_Qu._ 15. Are not the Species of Objects seen with both Eyes united
where the optick Nerves meet before they come into the Brain, the Fibres
on the right side of both Nerves uniting there, and after union going
thence into the Brain in the Nerve which is on the right side of the
Head, and the Fibres on the left side of both Nerves uniting in the same
place, and after union going into the Brain in the Nerve which is on the
left side of the Head, and these two Nerves meeting in the Brain in such
a manner that their Fibres make but one entire Species or Picture, half
of which on the right side of the Sensorium comes from the right side of
both Eyes through the right side of both optick Nerves to the place
where the Nerves meet, and from thence on the right side of the Head
into the Brain, and the other half on the left side of the Sensorium
comes in like manner from the left side of both Eyes. For the optick
Nerves of such Animals as look the same way with both Eyes (as of Men,
Dogs, Sheep, Oxen, &c.) meet before they come into the Brain, but the
optick Nerves of such Animals as do not look the same way with both Eyes
(as of Fishes, and of the Chameleon,) do not meet, if I am rightly
inform'd.

_Qu._ 16. When a Man in the dark presses either corner of his Eye with
his Finger, and turns his Eye away from his Finger, he will see a Circle
of Colours like those in the Feather of a Peacock's Tail. If the Eye and
the Finger remain quiet these Colours vanish in a second Minute of Time,
but if the Finger be moved with a quavering Motion they appear again. Do
not these Colours arise from such Motions excited in the bottom of the
Eye by the Pressure and Motion of the Finger, as, at other times are
excited there by Light for causing Vision? And do not the Motions once
excited continue about a Second of Time before they cease? And when a
Man by a stroke upon his Eye sees a flash of Light, are not the like
Motions excited in the _Retina_ by the stroke? And when a Coal of Fire
moved nimbly in the circumference of a Circle, makes the whole
circumference appear like a Circle of Fire; is it not because the
Motions excited in the bottom of the Eye by the Rays of Light are of a
lasting nature, and continue till the Coal of Fire in going round
returns to its former place? And considering the lastingness of the
Motions excited in the bottom of the Eye by Light, are they not of a
vibrating nature?

_Qu._ 17. If a stone be thrown into stagnating Water, the Waves excited
thereby continue some time to arise in the place where the Stone fell
into the Water, and are propagated from thence in concentrick Circles
upon the Surface of the Water to great distances. And the Vibrations or
Tremors excited in the Air by percussion, continue a little time to move
from the place of percussion in concentrick Spheres to great distances.
And in like manner, when a Ray of Light falls upon the Surface of any
pellucid Body, and is there refracted or reflected, may not Waves of
Vibrations, or Tremors, be thereby excited in the refracting or
reflecting Medium at the point of Incidence, and continue to arise
there, and to be propagated from thence as long as they continue to
arise and be propagated, when they are excited in the bottom of the Eye
by the Pressure or Motion of the Finger, or by the Light which comes
from the Coal of Fire in the Experiments above-mention'd? and are not
these Vibrations propagated from the point of Incidence to great
distances? And do they not overtake the Rays of Light, and by overtaking
them successively, do they not put them into the Fits of easy Reflexion
and easy Transmission described above? For if the Rays endeavour to
recede from the densest part of the Vibration, they may be alternately
accelerated and retarded by the Vibrations overtaking them.

_Qu._ 18. If in two large tall cylindrical Vessels of Glass inverted,
two little Thermometers be suspended so as not to touch the Vessels, and
the Air be drawn out of one of these Vessels, and these Vessels thus
prepared be carried out of a cold place into a warm one; the Thermometer
_in vacuo_ will grow warm as much, and almost as soon as the Thermometer
which is not _in vacuo_. And when the Vessels are carried back into the
cold place, the Thermometer _in vacuo_ will grow cold almost as soon as
the other Thermometer. Is not the Heat of the warm Room convey'd through
the _Vacuum_ by the Vibrations of a much subtiler Medium than Air, which
after the Air was drawn out remained in the _Vacuum_? And is not this
Medium the same with that Medium by which Light is refracted and
reflected, and by whose Vibrations Light communicates Heat to Bodies,
and is put into Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission? And do not
the Vibrations of this Medium in hot Bodies contribute to the
intenseness and duration of their Heat? And do not hot Bodies
communicate their Heat to contiguous cold ones, by the Vibrations of
this Medium propagated from them into the cold ones? And is not this
Medium exceedingly more rare and subtile than the Air, and exceedingly
more elastick and active? And doth it not readily pervade all Bodies?
And is it not (by its elastick force) expanded through all the Heavens?

_Qu._ 19. Doth not the Refraction of Light proceed from the different
density of this Æthereal Medium in different places, the Light receding
always from the denser parts of the Medium? And is not the density
thereof greater in free and open Spaces void of Air and other grosser
Bodies, than within the Pores of Water, Glass, Crystal, Gems, and other
compact Bodies? For when Light passes through Glass or Crystal, and
falling very obliquely upon the farther Surface thereof is totally
reflected, the total Reflexion ought to proceed rather from the density
and vigour of the Medium without and beyond the Glass, than from the
rarity and weakness thereof.

_Qu._ 20. Doth not this Æthereal Medium in passing out of Water, Glass,
Crystal, and other compact and dense Bodies into empty Spaces, grow
denser and denser by degrees, and by that means refract the Rays of
Light not in a point, but by bending them gradually in curve Lines? And
doth not the gradual condensation of this Medium extend to some distance
from the Bodies, and thereby cause the Inflexions of the Rays of Light,
which pass by the edges of dense Bodies, at some distance from the
Bodies?

_Qu._ 21. Is not this Medium much rarer within the dense Bodies of the
Sun, Stars, Planets and Comets, than in the empty celestial Spaces
between them? And in passing from them to great distances, doth it not
grow denser and denser perpetually, and thereby cause the gravity of
those great Bodies towards one another, and of their parts towards the
Bodies; every Body endeavouring to go from the denser parts of the
Medium towards the rarer? For if this Medium be rarer within the Sun's
Body than at its Surface, and rarer there than at the hundredth part of
an Inch from its Body, and rarer there than at the fiftieth part of an
Inch from its Body, and rarer there than at the Orb of _Saturn_; I see
no reason why the Increase of density should stop any where, and not
rather be continued through all distances from the Sun to _Saturn_, and
beyond. And though this Increase of density may at great distances be
exceeding slow, yet if the elastick force of this Medium be exceeding
great, it may suffice to impel Bodies from the denser parts of the
Medium towards the rarer, with all that power which we call Gravity. And
that the elastick force of this Medium is exceeding great, may be
gather'd from the swiftness of its Vibrations. Sounds move about 1140
_English_ Feet in a second Minute of Time, and in seven or eight Minutes
of Time they move about one hundred _English_ Miles. Light moves from
the Sun to us in about seven or eight Minutes of Time, which distance is
about 70,000,000 _English_ Miles, supposing the horizontal Parallax of
the Sun to be about 12´´. And the Vibrations or Pulses of this Medium,
that they may cause the alternate Fits of easy Transmission and easy
Reflexion, must be swifter than Light, and by consequence above 700,000
times swifter than Sounds. And therefore the elastick force of this
Medium, in proportion to its density, must be above 700000 x 700000
(that is, above 490,000,000,000) times greater than the elastick force
of the Air is in proportion to its density. For the Velocities of the
Pulses of elastick Mediums are in a subduplicate _Ratio_ of the
Elasticities and the Rarities of the Mediums taken together.

As Attraction is stronger in small Magnets than in great ones in
proportion to their Bulk, and Gravity is greater in the Surfaces of
small Planets than in those of great ones in proportion to their bulk,
and small Bodies are agitated much more by electric attraction than
great ones; so the smallness of the Rays of Light may contribute very
much to the power of the Agent by which they are refracted. And so if
any one should suppose that _Æther_ (like our Air) may contain Particles
which endeavour to recede from one another (for I do not know what this
_Æther_ is) and that its Particles are exceedingly smaller than those of
Air, or even than those of Light: The exceeding smallness of its
Particles may contribute to the greatness of the force by which those
Particles may recede from one another, and thereby make that Medium
exceedingly more rare and elastick than Air, and by consequence
exceedingly less able to resist the motions of Projectiles, and
exceedingly more able to press upon gross Bodies, by endeavouring to
expand it self.

_Qu._ 22. May not Planets and Comets, and all gross Bodies, perform
their Motions more freely, and with less resistance in this Æthereal
Medium than in any Fluid, which fills all Space adequately without
leaving any Pores, and by consequence is much denser than Quick-silver
or Gold? And may not its resistance be so small, as to be
inconsiderable? For instance; If this _Æther_ (for so I will call it)
should be supposed 700000 times more elastick than our Air, and above
700000 times more rare; its resistance would be above 600,000,000 times
less than that of Water. And so small a resistance would scarce make any
sensible alteration in the Motions of the Planets in ten thousand
Years. If any one would ask how a Medium can be so rare, let him tell me
how the Air, in the upper parts of the Atmosphere, can be above an
hundred thousand thousand times rarer than Gold. Let him also tell me,
how an electrick Body can by Friction emit an Exhalation so rare and
subtile, and yet so potent, as by its Emission to cause no sensible
Diminution of the weight of the electrick Body, and to be expanded
through a Sphere, whose Diameter is above two Feet, and yet to be able
to agitate and carry up Leaf Copper, or Leaf Gold, at the distance of
above a Foot from the electrick Body? And how the Effluvia of a Magnet
can be so rare and subtile, as to pass through a Plate of Glass without
any Resistance or Diminution of their Force, and yet so potent as to
turn a magnetick Needle beyond the Glass?

_Qu._ 23. Is not Vision perform'd chiefly by the Vibrations of this
Medium, excited in the bottom of the Eye by the Rays of Light, and
propagated through the solid, pellucid and uniform Capillamenta of the
optick Nerves into the place of Sensation? And is not Hearing perform'd
by the Vibrations either of this or some other Medium, excited in the
auditory Nerves by the Tremors of the Air, and propagated through the
solid, pellucid and uniform Capillamenta of those Nerves into the place
of Sensation? And so of the other Senses.

_Qu._ 24. Is not Animal Motion perform'd by the Vibrations of this
Medium, excited in the Brain by the power of the Will, and propagated
from thence through the solid, pellucid and uniform Capillamenta of the
Nerves into the Muscles, for contracting and dilating them? I suppose
that the Capillamenta of the Nerves are each of them solid and uniform,
that the vibrating Motion of the Æthereal Medium may be propagated along
them from one end to the other uniformly, and without interruption: For
Obstructions in the Nerves create Palsies. And that they may be
sufficiently uniform, I suppose them to be pellucid when view'd singly,
tho' the Reflexions in their cylindrical Surfaces may make the whole
Nerve (composed of many Capillamenta) appear opake and white. For
opacity arises from reflecting Surfaces, such as may disturb and
interrupt the Motions of this Medium.

[Sidenote: _See the following Scheme, p. 356._]

_Qu._ 25. Are there not other original Properties of the Rays of Light,
besides those already described? An instance of another original
Property we have in the Refraction of Island Crystal, described first by
_Erasmus Bartholine_, and afterwards more exactly by _Hugenius_, in his
Book _De la Lumiere_. This Crystal is a pellucid fissile Stone, clear as
Water or Crystal of the Rock, and without Colour; enduring a red Heat
without losing its transparency, and in a very strong Heat calcining
without Fusion. Steep'd a Day or two in Water, it loses its natural
Polish. Being rubb'd on Cloth, it attracts pieces of Straws and other
light things, like Ambar or Glass; and with _Aqua fortis_ it makes an
Ebullition. It seems to be a sort of Talk, and is found in form of an
oblique Parallelopiped, with six parallelogram Sides and eight solid
Angles. The obtuse Angles of the Parallelograms are each of them 101
Degrees and 52 Minutes; the acute ones 78 Degrees and 8 Minutes. Two of
the solid Angles opposite to one another, as C and E, are compassed each
of them with three of these obtuse Angles, and each of the other six
with one obtuse and two acute ones. It cleaves easily in planes parallel
to any of its Sides, and not in any other Planes. It cleaves with a
glossy polite Surface not perfectly plane, but with some little
unevenness. It is easily scratch'd, and by reason of its softness it
takes a Polish very difficultly. It polishes better upon polish'd
Looking-glass than upon Metal, and perhaps better upon Pitch, Leather or
Parchment. Afterwards it must be rubb'd with a little Oil or white of an
Egg, to fill up its Scratches; whereby it will become very transparent
and polite. But for several Experiments, it is not necessary to polish
it. If a piece of this crystalline Stone be laid upon a Book, every
Letter of the Book seen through it will appear double, by means of a
double Refraction. And if any beam of Light falls either
perpendicularly, or in any oblique Angle upon any Surface of this
Crystal, it becomes divided into two beams by means of the same double
Refraction. Which beams are of the same Colour with the incident beam of
Light, and seem equal to one another in the quantity of their Light, or
very nearly equal. One of these Refractions is perform'd by the usual
Rule of Opticks, the Sine of Incidence out of Air into this Crystal
being to the Sine of Refraction, as five to three. The other
Refraction, which may be called the unusual Refraction, is perform'd by
the following Rule.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

Let ADBC represent the refracting Surface of the Crystal, C the biggest
solid Angle at that Surface, GEHF the opposite Surface, and CK a
perpendicular on that Surface. This perpendicular makes with the edge of
the Crystal CF, an Angle of 19 Degr. 3'. Join KF, and in it take KL, so
that the Angle KCL be 6 Degr. 40'. and the Angle LCF 12 Degr. 23'. And
if ST represent any beam of Light incident at T in any Angle upon the
refracting Surface ADBC, let TV be the refracted beam determin'd by the
given Portion of the Sines 5 to 3, according to the usual Rule of
Opticks. Draw VX parallel and equal to KL. Draw it the same way from V
in which L lieth from K; and joining TX, this line TX shall be the other
refracted beam carried from T to X, by the unusual Refraction.

If therefore the incident beam ST be perpendicular to the refracting
Surface, the two beams TV and TX, into which it shall become divided,
shall be parallel to the lines CK and CL; one of those beams going
through the Crystal perpendicularly, as it ought to do by the usual Laws
of Opticks, and the other TX by an unusual Refraction diverging from the
perpendicular, and making with it an Angle VTX of about 6-2/3 Degrees,
as is found by Experience. And hence, the Plane VTX, and such like
Planes which are parallel to the Plane CFK, may be called the Planes of
perpendicular Refraction. And the Coast towards which the lines KL and
VX are drawn, may be call'd the Coast of unusual Refraction.

In like manner Crystal of the Rock has a double Refraction: But the
difference of the two Refractions is not so great and manifest as in
Island Crystal.

When the beam ST incident on Island Crystal is divided into two beams TV
and TX, and these two beams arrive at the farther Surface of the Glass;
the beam TV, which was refracted at the first Surface after the usual
manner, shall be again refracted entirely after the usual manner at the
second Surface; and the beam TX, which was refracted after the unusual
manner in the first Surface, shall be again refracted entirely after the
unusual manner in the second Surface; so that both these beams shall
emerge out of the second Surface in lines parallel to the first incident
beam ST.

And if two pieces of Island Crystal be placed one after another, in such
manner that all the Surfaces of the latter be parallel to all the
corresponding Surfaces of the former: The Rays which are refracted after
the usual manner in the first Surface of the first Crystal, shall be
refracted after the usual manner in all the following Surfaces; and the
Rays which are refracted after the unusual manner in the first Surface,
shall be refracted after the unusual manner in all the following
Surfaces. And the same thing happens, though the Surfaces of the
Crystals be any ways inclined to one another, provided that their Planes
of perpendicular Refraction be parallel to one another.

And therefore there is an original difference in the Rays of Light, by
means of which some Rays are in this Experiment constantly refracted
after the usual manner, and others constantly after the unusual manner:
For if the difference be not original, but arises from new Modifications
impress'd on the Rays at their first Refraction, it would be alter'd by
new Modifications in the three following Refractions; whereas it suffers
no alteration, but is constant, and has the same effect upon the Rays in
all the Refractions. The unusual Refraction is therefore perform'd by an
original property of the Rays. And it remains to be enquired, whether
the Rays have not more original Properties than are yet discover'd.

_Qu._ 26. Have not the Rays of Light several sides, endued with several
original Properties? For if the Planes of perpendicular Refraction of
the second Crystal be at right Angles with the Planes of perpendicular
Refraction of the first Crystal, the Rays which are refracted after the
usual manner in passing through the first Crystal, will be all of them
refracted after the unusual manner in passing through the second
Crystal; and the Rays which are refracted after the unusual manner in
passing through the first Crystal, will be all of them refracted after
the usual manner in passing through the second Crystal. And therefore
there are not two sorts of Rays differing in their nature from one
another, one of which is constantly and in all Positions refracted after
the usual manner, and the other constantly and in all Positions after
the unusual manner. The difference between the two sorts of Rays in the
Experiment mention'd in the 25th Question, was only in the Positions of
the Sides of the Rays to the Planes of perpendicular Refraction. For one
and the same Ray is here refracted sometimes after the usual, and
sometimes after the unusual manner, according to the Position which its
Sides have to the Crystals. If the Sides of the Ray are posited the same
way to both Crystals, it is refracted after the same manner in them
both: But if that side of the Ray which looks towards the Coast of the
unusual Refraction of the first Crystal, be 90 Degrees from that side of
the same Ray which looks toward the Coast of the unusual Refraction of
the second Crystal, (which may be effected by varying the Position of
the second Crystal to the first, and by consequence to the Rays of
Light,) the Ray shall be refracted after several manners in the several
Crystals. There is nothing more required to determine whether the Rays
of Light which fall upon the second Crystal shall be refracted after
the usual or after the unusual manner, but to turn about this Crystal,
so that the Coast of this Crystal's unusual Refraction may be on this or
on that side of the Ray. And therefore every Ray may be consider'd as
having four Sides or Quarters, two of which opposite to one another
incline the Ray to be refracted after the unusual manner, as often as
either of them are turn'd towards the Coast of unusual Refraction; and
the other two, whenever either of them are turn'd towards the Coast of
unusual Refraction, do not incline it to be otherwise refracted than
after the usual manner. The two first may therefore be call'd the Sides
of unusual Refraction. And since these Dispositions were in the Rays
before their Incidence on the second, third, and fourth Surfaces of the
two Crystals, and suffered no alteration (so far as appears,) by the
Refraction of the Rays in their passage through those Surfaces, and the
Rays were refracted by the same Laws in all the four Surfaces; it
appears that those Dispositions were in the Rays originally, and
suffer'd no alteration by the first Refraction, and that by means of
those Dispositions the Rays were refracted at their Incidence on the
first Surface of the first Crystal, some of them after the usual, and
some of them after the unusual manner, accordingly as their Sides of
unusual Refraction were then turn'd towards the Coast of the unusual
Refraction of that Crystal, or sideways from it.

Every Ray of Light has therefore two opposite Sides, originally endued
with a Property on which the unusual Refraction depends, and the other
two opposite Sides not endued with that Property. And it remains to be
enquired, whether there are not more Properties of Light by which the
Sides of the Rays differ, and are distinguished from one another.

In explaining the difference of the Sides of the Rays above mention'd, I
have supposed that the Rays fall perpendicularly on the first Crystal.
But if they fall obliquely on it, the Success is the same. Those Rays
which are refracted after the usual manner in the first Crystal, will be
refracted after the unusual manner in the second Crystal, supposing the
Planes of perpendicular Refraction to be at right Angles with one
another, as above; and on the contrary.

If the Planes of the perpendicular Refraction of the two Crystals be
neither parallel nor perpendicular to one another, but contain an acute
Angle: The two beams of Light which emerge out of the first Crystal,
will be each of them divided into two more at their Incidence on the
second Crystal. For in this case the Rays in each of the two beams will
some of them have their Sides of unusual Refraction, and some of them
their other Sides turn'd towards the Coast of the unusual Refraction of
the second Crystal.

_Qu._ 27. Are not all Hypotheses erroneous which have hitherto been
invented for explaining the Phænomena of Light, by new Modifications of
the Rays? For those Phænomena depend not upon new Modifications, as has
been supposed, but upon the original and unchangeable Properties of the
Rays.

_Qu._ 28. Are not all Hypotheses erroneous, in which Light is supposed
to consist in Pression or Motion, propagated through a fluid Medium? For
in all these Hypotheses the Phænomena of Light have been hitherto
explain'd by supposing that they arise from new Modifications of the
Rays; which is an erroneous Supposition.

If Light consisted only in Pression propagated without actual Motion, it
would not be able to agitate and heat the Bodies which refract and
reflect it. If it consisted in Motion propagated to all distances in an
instant, it would require an infinite force every moment, in every
shining Particle, to generate that Motion. And if it consisted in
Pression or Motion, propagated either in an instant or in time, it would
bend into the Shadow. For Pression or Motion cannot be propagated in a
Fluid in right Lines, beyond an Obstacle which stops part of the Motion,
but will bend and spread every way into the quiescent Medium which lies
beyond the Obstacle. Gravity tends downwards, but the Pressure of Water
arising from Gravity tends every way with equal Force, and is propagated
as readily, and with as much force sideways as downwards, and through
crooked passages as through strait ones. The Waves on the Surface of
stagnating Water, passing by the sides of a broad Obstacle which stops
part of them, bend afterwards and dilate themselves gradually into the
quiet Water behind the Obstacle. The Waves, Pulses or Vibrations of the
Air, wherein Sounds consist, bend manifestly, though not so much as the
Waves of Water. For a Bell or a Cannon may be heard beyond a Hill which
intercepts the sight of the sounding Body, and Sounds are propagated as
readily through crooked Pipes as through streight ones. But Light is
never known to follow crooked Passages nor to bend into the Shadow. For
the fix'd Stars by the Interposition of any of the Planets cease to be
seen. And so do the Parts of the Sun by the Interposition of the Moon,
_Mercury_ or _Venus_. The Rays which pass very near to the edges of any
Body, are bent a little by the action of the Body, as we shew'd above;
but this bending is not towards but from the Shadow, and is perform'd
only in the passage of the Ray by the Body, and at a very small distance
from it. So soon as the Ray is past the Body, it goes right on.

[Sidenote: _Mais pour dire comment cela se fait, je n'ay rien trove
jusqu' ici qui me satisfasse._ C. H. de la lumiere, c. 5, p. 91.]

To explain the unusual Refraction of Island Crystal by Pression or
Motion propagated, has not hitherto been attempted (to my knowledge)
except by _Huygens_, who for that end supposed two several vibrating
Mediums within that Crystal. But when he tried the Refractions in two
successive pieces of that Crystal, and found them such as is mention'd
above; he confessed himself at a loss for explaining them. For Pressions
or Motions, propagated from a shining Body through an uniform Medium,
must be on all sides alike; whereas by those Experiments it appears,
that the Rays of Light have different Properties in their different
Sides. He suspected that the Pulses of _Æther_ in passing through the
first Crystal might receive certain new Modifications, which might
determine them to be propagated in this or that Medium within the
second Crystal, according to the Position of that Crystal. But what
Modifications those might be he could not say, nor think of any thing
satisfactory in that Point. And if he had known that the unusual
Refraction depends not on new Modifications, but on the original and
unchangeable Dispositions of the Rays, he would have found it as
difficult to explain how those Dispositions which he supposed to be
impress'd on the Rays by the first Crystal, could be in them before
their Incidence on that Crystal, and in general, how all Rays emitted by
shining Bodies, can have those Dispositions in them from the beginning.
To me, at least, this seems inexplicable, if Light be nothing else than
Pression or Motion propagated through _Æther_.

And it is as difficult to explain by these Hypotheses, how Rays can be
alternately in Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission; unless
perhaps one might suppose that there are in all Space two Æthereal
vibrating Mediums, and that the Vibrations of one of them constitute
Light, and the Vibrations of the other are swifter, and as often as they
overtake the Vibrations of the first, put them into those Fits. But how
two _Æthers_ can be diffused through all Space, one of which acts upon
the other, and by consequence is re-acted upon, without retarding,
shattering, dispersing and confounding one anothers Motions, is
inconceivable. And against filling the Heavens with fluid Mediums,
unless they be exceeding rare, a great Objection arises from the regular
and very lasting Motions of the Planets and Comets in all manner of
Courses through the Heavens. For thence it is manifest, that the Heavens
are void of all sensible Resistance, and by consequence of all sensible
Matter.

For the resisting Power of fluid Mediums arises partly from the
Attrition of the Parts of the Medium, and partly from the _Vis inertiæ_
of the Matter. That part of the Resistance of a spherical Body which
arises from the Attrition of the Parts of the Medium is very nearly as
the Diameter, or, at the most, as the _Factum_ of the Diameter, and the
Velocity of the spherical Body together. And that part of the Resistance
which arises from the _Vis inertiæ_ of the Matter, is as the Square of
that _Factum_. And by this difference the two sorts of Resistance may be
distinguish'd from one another in any Medium; and these being
distinguish'd, it will be found that almost all the Resistance of Bodies
of a competent Magnitude moving in Air, Water, Quick-silver, and such
like Fluids with a competent Velocity, arises from the _Vis inertiæ_ of
the Parts of the Fluid.

Now that part of the resisting Power of any Medium which arises from the
Tenacity, Friction or Attrition of the Parts of the Medium, may be
diminish'd by dividing the Matter into smaller Parts, and making the
Parts more smooth and slippery: But that part of the Resistance which
arises from the _Vis inertiæ_, is proportional to the Density of the
Matter, and cannot be diminish'd by dividing the Matter into smaller
Parts, nor by any other means than by decreasing the Density of the
Medium. And for these Reasons the Density of fluid Mediums is very
nearly proportional to their Resistance. Liquors which differ not much
in Density, as Water, Spirit of Wine, Spirit of Turpentine, hot Oil,
differ not much in Resistance. Water is thirteen or fourteen times
lighter than Quick-silver and by consequence thirteen or fourteen times
rarer, and its Resistance is less than that of Quick-silver in the same
Proportion, or thereabouts, as I have found by Experiments made with
Pendulums. The open Air in which we breathe is eight or nine hundred
times lighter than Water, and by consequence eight or nine hundred times
rarer, and accordingly its Resistance is less than that of Water in the
same Proportion, or thereabouts; as I have also found by Experiments
made with Pendulums. And in thinner Air the Resistance is still less,
and at length, by ratifying the Air, becomes insensible. For small
Feathers falling in the open Air meet with great Resistance, but in a
tall Glass well emptied of Air, they fall as fast as Lead or Gold, as I
have seen tried several times. Whence the Resistance seems still to
decrease in proportion to the Density of the Fluid. For I do not find by
any Experiments, that Bodies moving in Quick-silver, Water or Air, meet
with any other sensible Resistance than what arises from the Density and
Tenacity of those sensible Fluids, as they would do if the Pores of
those Fluids, and all other Spaces, were filled with a dense and
subtile Fluid. Now if the Resistance in a Vessel well emptied of Air,
was but an hundred times less than in the open Air, it would be about a
million of times less than in Quick-silver. But it seems to be much less
in such a Vessel, and still much less in the Heavens, at the height of
three or four hundred Miles from the Earth, or above. For Mr. _Boyle_
has shew'd that Air may be rarified above ten thousand times in Vessels
of Glass; and the Heavens are much emptier of Air than any _Vacuum_ we
can make below. For since the Air is compress'd by the Weight of the
incumbent Atmosphere, and the Density of Air is proportional to the
Force compressing it, it follows by Computation, that at the height of
about seven and a half _English_ Miles from the Earth, the Air is four
times rarer than at the Surface of the Earth; and at the height of 15
Miles it is sixteen times rarer than that at the Surface of the Earth;
and at the height of 22-1/2, 30, or 38 Miles, it is respectively 64,
256, or 1024 times rarer, or thereabouts; and at the height of 76, 152,
228 Miles, it is about 1000000, 1000000000000, or 1000000000000000000
times rarer; and so on.

Heat promotes Fluidity very much by diminishing the Tenacity of Bodies.
It makes many Bodies fluid which are not fluid in cold, and increases
the Fluidity of tenacious Liquids, as of Oil, Balsam, and Honey, and
thereby decreases their Resistance. But it decreases not the Resistance
of Water considerably, as it would do if any considerable part of the
Resistance of Water arose from the Attrition or Tenacity of its Parts.
And therefore the Resistance of Water arises principally and almost
entirely from the _Vis inertiæ_ of its Matter; and by consequence, if
the Heavens were as dense as Water, they would not have much less
Resistance than Water; if as dense as Quick-silver, they would not have
much less Resistance than Quick-silver; if absolutely dense, or full of
Matter without any _Vacuum_, let the Matter be never so subtil and
fluid, they would have a greater Resistance than Quick-silver. A solid
Globe in such a Medium would lose above half its Motion in moving three
times the length of its Diameter, and a Globe not solid (such as are the
Planets,) would be retarded sooner. And therefore to make way for the
regular and lasting Motions of the Planets and Comets, it's necessary to
empty the Heavens of all Matter, except perhaps some very thin Vapours,
Steams, or Effluvia, arising from the Atmospheres of the Earth, Planets,
and Comets, and from such an exceedingly rare Æthereal Medium as we
described above. A dense Fluid can be of no use for explaining the
Phænomena of Nature, the Motions of the Planets and Comets being better
explain'd without it. It serves only to disturb and retard the Motions
of those great Bodies, and make the Frame of Nature languish: And in the
Pores of Bodies, it serves only to stop the vibrating Motions of their
Parts, wherein their Heat and Activity consists. And as it is of no use,
and hinders the Operations of Nature, and makes her languish, so there
is no evidence for its Existence, and therefore it ought to be rejected.
And if it be rejected, the Hypotheses that Light consists in Pression
or Motion, propagated through such a Medium, are rejected with it.

And for rejecting such a Medium, we have the Authority of those the
oldest and most celebrated Philosophers of _Greece_ and _Phoenicia_,
who made a _Vacuum_, and Atoms, and the Gravity of Atoms, the first
Principles of their Philosophy; tacitly attributing Gravity to some
other Cause than dense Matter. Later Philosophers banish the
Consideration of such a Cause out of natural Philosophy, feigning
Hypotheses for explaining all things mechanically, and referring other
Causes to Metaphysicks: Whereas the main Business of natural Philosophy
is to argue from Phænomena without feigning Hypotheses, and to deduce
Causes from Effects, till we come to the very first Cause, which
certainly is not mechanical; and not only to unfold the Mechanism of the
World, but chiefly to resolve these and such like Questions. What is
there in places almost empty of Matter, and whence is it that the Sun
and Planets gravitate towards one another, without dense Matter between
them? Whence is it that Nature doth nothing in vain; and whence arises
all that Order and Beauty which we see in the World? To what end are
Comets, and whence is it that Planets move all one and the same way in
Orbs concentrick, while Comets move all manner of ways in Orbs very
excentrick; and what hinders the fix'd Stars from falling upon one
another? How came the Bodies of Animals to be contrived with so much
Art, and for what ends were their several Parts? Was the Eye contrived
without Skill in Opticks, and the Ear without Knowledge of Sounds? How
do the Motions of the Body follow from the Will, and whence is the
Instinct in Animals? Is not the Sensory of Animals that place to which
the sensitive Substance is present, and into which the sensible Species
of Things are carried through the Nerves and Brain, that there they may
be perceived by their immediate presence to that Substance? And these
things being rightly dispatch'd, does it not appear from Phænomena that
there is a Being incorporeal, living, intelligent, omnipresent, who in
infinite Space, as it were in his Sensory, sees the things themselves
intimately, and throughly perceives them, and comprehends them wholly by
their immediate presence to himself: Of which things the Images only
carried through the Organs of Sense into our little Sensoriums, are
there seen and beheld by that which in us perceives and thinks. And
though every true Step made in this Philosophy brings us not immediately
to the Knowledge of the first Cause, yet it brings us nearer to it, and
on that account is to be highly valued.

_Qu._ 29. Are not the Rays of Light very small Bodies emitted from
shining Substances? For such Bodies will pass through uniform Mediums in
right Lines without bending into the Shadow, which is the Nature of the
Rays of Light. They will also be capable of several Properties, and be
able to conserve their Properties unchanged in passing through several
Mediums, which is another Condition of the Rays of Light. Pellucid
Substances act upon the Rays of Light at a distance in refracting,
reflecting, and inflecting them, and the Rays mutually agitate the Parts
of those Substances at a distance for heating them; and this Action and
Re-action at a distance very much resembles an attractive Force between
Bodies. If Refraction be perform'd by Attraction of the Rays, the Sines
of Incidence must be to the Sines of Refraction in a given Proportion,
as we shew'd in our Principles of Philosophy: And this Rule is true by
Experience. The Rays of Light in going out of Glass into a _Vacuum_, are
bent towards the Glass; and if they fall too obliquely on the _Vacuum_,
they are bent backwards into the Glass, and totally reflected; and this
Reflexion cannot be ascribed to the Resistance of an absolute _Vacuum_,
but must be caused by the Power of the Glass attracting the Rays at
their going out of it into the _Vacuum_, and bringing them back. For if
the farther Surface of the Glass be moisten'd with Water or clear Oil,
or liquid and clear Honey, the Rays which would otherwise be reflected
will go into the Water, Oil, or Honey; and therefore are not reflected
before they arrive at the farther Surface of the Glass, and begin to go
out of it. If they go out of it into the Water, Oil, or Honey, they go
on, because the Attraction of the Glass is almost balanced and rendered
ineffectual by the contrary Attraction of the Liquor. But if they go out
of it into a _Vacuum_ which has no Attraction to balance that of the
Glass, the Attraction of the Glass either bends and refracts them, or
brings them back and reflects them. And this is still more evident by
laying together two Prisms of Glass, or two Object-glasses of very long
Telescopes, the one plane, the other a little convex, and so compressing
them that they do not fully touch, nor are too far asunder. For the
Light which falls upon the farther Surface of the first Glass where the
Interval between the Glasses is not above the ten hundred thousandth
Part of an Inch, will go through that Surface, and through the Air or
_Vacuum_ between the Glasses, and enter into the second Glass, as was
explain'd in the first, fourth, and eighth Observations of the first
Part of the second Book. But, if the second Glass be taken away, the
Light which goes out of the second Surface of the first Glass into the
Air or _Vacuum_, will not go on forwards, but turns back into the first
Glass, and is reflected; and therefore it is drawn back by the Power of
the first Glass, there being nothing else to turn it back. Nothing more
is requisite for producing all the variety of Colours, and degrees of
Refrangibility, than that the Rays of Light be Bodies of different
Sizes, the least of which may take violet the weakest and darkest of the
Colours, and be more easily diverted by refracting Surfaces from the
right Course; and the rest as they are bigger and bigger, may make the
stronger and more lucid Colours, blue, green, yellow, and red, and be
more and more difficultly diverted. Nothing more is requisite for
putting the Rays of Light into Fits of easy Reflexion and easy
Transmission, than that they be small Bodies which by their attractive
Powers, or some other Force, stir up Vibrations in what they act upon,
which Vibrations being swifter than the Rays, overtake them
successively, and agitate them so as by turns to increase and decrease
their Velocities, and thereby put them into those Fits. And lastly, the
unusual Refraction of Island-Crystal looks very much as if it were
perform'd by some kind of attractive virtue lodged in certain Sides both
of the Rays, and of the Particles of the Crystal. For were it not for
some kind of Disposition or Virtue lodged in some Sides of the Particles
of the Crystal, and not in their other Sides, and which inclines and
bends the Rays towards the Coast of unusual Refraction, the Rays which
fall perpendicularly on the Crystal, would not be refracted towards that
Coast rather than towards any other Coast, both at their Incidence and
at their Emergence, so as to emerge perpendicularly by a contrary
Situation of the Coast of unusual Refraction at the second Surface; the
Crystal acting upon the Rays after they have pass'd through it, and are
emerging into the Air; or, if you please, into a _Vacuum_. And since the
Crystal by this Disposition or Virtue does not act upon the Rays, unless
when one of their Sides of unusual Refraction looks towards that Coast,
this argues a Virtue or Disposition in those Sides of the Rays, which
answers to, and sympathizes with that Virtue or Disposition of the
Crystal, as the Poles of two Magnets answer to one another. And as
Magnetism may be intended and remitted, and is found only in the Magnet
and in Iron: So this Virtue of refracting the perpendicular Rays is
greater in Island-Crystal, less in Crystal of the Rock, and is not yet
found in other Bodies. I do not say that this Virtue is magnetical: It
seems to be of another kind. I only say, that whatever it be, it's
difficult to conceive how the Rays of Light, unless they be Bodies, can
have a permanent Virtue in two of their Sides which is not in their
other Sides, and this without any regard to their Position to the Space
or Medium through which they pass.

What I mean in this Question by a _Vacuum_, and by the Attractions of
the Rays of Light towards Glass or Crystal, may be understood by what
was said in the 18th, 19th, and 20th Questions.

_Quest._ 30. Are not gross Bodies and Light convertible into one
another, and may not Bodies receive much of their Activity from the
Particles of Light which enter their Composition? For all fix'd Bodies
being heated emit Light so long as they continue sufficiently hot, and
Light mutually stops in Bodies as often as its Rays strike upon their
Parts, as we shew'd above. I know no Body less apt to shine than Water;
and yet Water by frequent Distillations changes into fix'd Earth, as Mr.
_Boyle_ has try'd; and then this Earth being enabled to endure a
sufficient Heat, shines by Heat like other Bodies.

The changing of Bodies into Light, and Light into Bodies, is very
conformable to the Course of Nature, which seems delighted with
Transmutations. Water, which is a very fluid tasteless Salt, she changes
by Heat into Vapour, which is a sort of Air, and by Cold into Ice, which
is a hard, pellucid, brittle, fusible Stone; and this Stone returns into
Water by Heat, and Vapour returns into Water by Cold. Earth by Heat
becomes Fire, and by Cold returns into Earth. Dense Bodies by
Fermentation rarify into several sorts of Air, and this Air by
Fermentation, and sometimes without it, returns into dense Bodies.
Mercury appears sometimes in the form of a fluid Metal, sometimes in the
form of a hard brittle Metal, sometimes in the form of a corrosive
pellucid Salt call'd Sublimate, sometimes in the form of a tasteless,
pellucid, volatile white Earth, call'd _Mercurius Dulcis_; or in that of
a red opake volatile Earth, call'd Cinnaber; or in that of a red or
white Precipitate, or in that of a fluid Salt; and in Distillation it
turns into Vapour, and being agitated _in Vacuo_, it shines like Fire.
And after all these Changes it returns again into its first form of
Mercury. Eggs grow from insensible Magnitudes, and change into Animals;
Tadpoles into Frogs; and Worms into Flies. All Birds, Beasts and Fishes,
Insects, Trees, and other Vegetables, with their several Parts, grow out
of Water and watry Tinctures and Salts, and by Putrefaction return again
into watry Substances. And Water standing a few Days in the open Air,
yields a Tincture, which (like that of Malt) by standing longer yields a
Sediment and a Spirit, but before Putrefaction is fit Nourishment for
Animals and Vegetables. And among such various and strange
Transmutations, why may not Nature change Bodies into Light, and Light
into Bodies?

_Quest._ 31. Have not the small Particles of Bodies certain Powers,
Virtues, or Forces, by which they act at a distance, not only upon the
Rays of Light for reflecting, refracting, and inflecting them, but also
upon one another for producing a great Part of the Phænomena of Nature?
For it's well known, that Bodies act one upon another by the Attractions
of Gravity, Magnetism, and Electricity; and these Instances shew the
Tenor and Course of Nature, and make it not improbable but that there
may be more attractive Powers than these. For Nature is very consonant
and conformable to her self. How these Attractions may be perform'd, I
do not here consider. What I call Attraction may be perform'd by
impulse, or by some other means unknown to me. I use that Word here to
signify only in general any Force by which Bodies tend towards one
another, whatsoever be the Cause. For we must learn from the Phænomena
of Nature what Bodies attract one another, and what are the Laws and
Properties of the Attraction, before we enquire the Cause by which the
Attraction is perform'd. The Attractions of Gravity, Magnetism, and
Electricity, reach to very sensible distances, and so have been observed
by vulgar Eyes, and there may be others which reach to so small
distances as hitherto escape Observation; and perhaps electrical
Attraction may reach to such small distances, even without being excited
by Friction.

For when Salt of Tartar runs _per Deliquium_, is not this done by an
Attraction between the Particles of the Salt of Tartar, and the
Particles of the Water which float in the Air in the form of Vapours?
And why does not common Salt, or Salt-petre, or Vitriol, run _per
Deliquium_, but for want of such an Attraction? Or why does not Salt of
Tartar draw more Water out of the Air than in a certain Proportion to
its quantity, but for want of an attractive Force after it is satiated
with Water? And whence is it but from this attractive Power that Water
which alone distils with a gentle luke-warm Heat, will not distil from
Salt of Tartar without a great Heat? And is it not from the like
attractive Power between the Particles of Oil of Vitriol and the
Particles of Water, that Oil of Vitriol draws to it a good quantity of
Water out of the Air, and after it is satiated draws no more, and in
Distillation lets go the Water very difficultly? And when Water and Oil
of Vitriol poured successively into the same Vessel grow very hot in the
mixing, does not this Heat argue a great Motion in the Parts of the
Liquors? And does not this Motion argue, that the Parts of the two
Liquors in mixing coalesce with Violence, and by consequence rush
towards one another with an accelerated Motion? And when _Aqua fortis_,
or Spirit of Vitriol poured upon Filings of Iron dissolves the Filings
with a great Heat and Ebullition, is not this Heat and Ebullition
effected by a violent Motion of the Parts, and does not that Motion
argue that the acid Parts of the Liquor rush towards the Parts of the
Metal with violence, and run forcibly into its Pores till they get
between its outmost Particles, and the main Mass of the Metal, and
surrounding those Particles loosen them from the main Mass, and set them
at liberty to float off into the Water? And when the acid Particles,
which alone would distil with an easy Heat, will not separate from the
Particles of the Metal without a very violent Heat, does not this
confirm the Attraction between them?

When Spirit of Vitriol poured upon common Salt or Salt-petre makes an
Ebullition with the Salt, and unites with it, and in Distillation the
Spirit of the common Salt or Salt-petre comes over much easier than it
would do before, and the acid part of the Spirit of Vitriol stays
behind; does not this argue that the fix'd Alcaly of the Salt attracts
the acid Spirit of the Vitriol more strongly than its own Spirit, and
not being able to hold them both, lets go its own? And when Oil of
Vitriol is drawn off from its weight of Nitre, and from both the
Ingredients a compound Spirit of Nitre is distilled, and two parts of
this Spirit are poured on one part of Oil of Cloves or Carraway Seeds,
or of any ponderous Oil of vegetable or animal Substances, or Oil of
Turpentine thicken'd with a little Balsam of Sulphur, and the Liquors
grow so very hot in mixing, as presently to send up a burning Flame;
does not this very great and sudden Heat argue that the two Liquors mix
with violence, and that their Parts in mixing run towards one another
with an accelerated Motion, and clash with the greatest Force? And is it
not for the same reason that well rectified Spirit of Wine poured on the
same compound Spirit flashes; and that the _Pulvis fulminans_, composed
of Sulphur, Nitre, and Salt of Tartar, goes off with a more sudden and
violent Explosion than Gun-powder, the acid Spirits of the Sulphur and
Nitre rushing towards one another, and towards the Salt of Tartar, with
so great a violence, as by the shock to turn the whole at once into
Vapour and Flame? Where the Dissolution is slow, it makes a slow
Ebullition and a gentle Heat; and where it is quicker, it makes a
greater Ebullition with more heat; and where it is done at once, the
Ebullition is contracted into a sudden Blast or violent Explosion, with
a heat equal to that of Fire and Flame. So when a Drachm of the
above-mention'd compound Spirit of Nitre was poured upon half a Drachm
of Oil of Carraway Seeds _in vacuo_, the Mixture immediately made a
flash like Gun-powder, and burst the exhausted Receiver, which was a
Glass six Inches wide, and eight Inches deep. And even the gross Body of
Sulphur powder'd, and with an equal weight of Iron Filings and a little
Water made into Paste, acts upon the Iron, and in five or six hours
grows too hot to be touch'd, and emits a Flame. And by these Experiments
compared with the great quantity of Sulphur with which the Earth
abounds, and the warmth of the interior Parts of the Earth, and hot
Springs, and burning Mountains, and with Damps, mineral Coruscations,
Earthquakes, hot suffocating Exhalations, Hurricanes, and Spouts; we may
learn that sulphureous Steams abound in the Bowels of the Earth and
ferment with Minerals, and sometimes take fire with a sudden Coruscation
and Explosion; and if pent up in subterraneous Caverns, burst the
Caverns with a great shaking of the Earth, as in springing of a Mine.
And then the Vapour generated by the Explosion, expiring through the
Pores of the Earth, feels hot and suffocates, and makes Tempests and
Hurricanes, and sometimes causes the Land to slide, or the Sea to boil,
and carries up the Water thereof in Drops, which by their weight fall
down again in Spouts. Also some sulphureous Steams, at all times when
the Earth is dry, ascending into the Air, ferment there with nitrous
Acids, and sometimes taking fire cause Lightning and Thunder, and fiery
Meteors. For the Air abounds with acid Vapours fit to promote
Fermentations, as appears by the rusting of Iron and Copper in it, the
kindling of Fire by blowing, and the beating of the Heart by means of
Respiration. Now the above-mention'd Motions are so great and violent as
to shew that in Fermentations the Particles of Bodies which almost rest,
are put into new Motions by a very potent Principle, which acts upon
them only when they approach one another, and causes them to meet and
clash with great violence, and grow hot with the motion, and dash one
another into pieces, and vanish into Air, and Vapour, and Flame.

When Salt of Tartar _per deliquium_, being poured into the Solution of
any Metal, precipitates the Metal and makes it fall down to the bottom
of the Liquor in the form of Mud: Does not this argue that the acid
Particles are attracted more strongly by the Salt of Tartar than by the
Metal, and by the stronger Attraction go from the Metal to the Salt of
Tartar? And so when a Solution of Iron in _Aqua fortis_ dissolves the
_Lapis Calaminaris_, and lets go the Iron, or a Solution of Copper
dissolves Iron immersed in it and lets go the Copper, or a Solution of
Silver dissolves Copper and lets go the Silver, or a Solution of Mercury
in _Aqua fortis_ being poured upon Iron, Copper, Tin, or Lead, dissolves
the Metal and lets go the Mercury; does not this argue that the acid
Particles of the _Aqua fortis_ are attracted more strongly by the _Lapis
Calaminaris_ than by Iron, and more strongly by Iron than by Copper, and
more strongly by Copper than by Silver, and more strongly by Iron,
Copper, Tin, and Lead, than by Mercury? And is it not for the same
reason that Iron requires more _Aqua fortis_ to dissolve it than Copper,
and Copper more than the other Metals; and that of all Metals, Iron is
dissolved most easily, and is most apt to rust; and next after Iron,
Copper?

When Oil of Vitriol is mix'd with a little Water, or is run _per
deliquium_, and in Distillation the Water ascends difficultly, and
brings over with it some part of the Oil of Vitriol in the form of
Spirit of Vitriol, and this Spirit being poured upon Iron, Copper, or
Salt of Tartar, unites with the Body and lets go the Water; doth not
this shew that the acid Spirit is attracted by the Water, and more
attracted by the fix'd Body than by the Water, and therefore lets go the
Water to close with the fix'd Body? And is it not for the same reason
that the Water and acid Spirits which are mix'd together in Vinegar,
_Aqua fortis_, and Spirit of Salt, cohere and rise together in
Distillation; but if the _Menstruum_ be poured on Salt of Tartar, or on
Lead, or Iron, or any fix'd Body which it can dissolve, the Acid by a
stronger Attraction adheres to the Body, and lets go the Water? And is
it not also from a mutual Attraction that the Spirits of Soot and
Sea-Salt unite and compose the Particles of Sal-armoniac, which are less
volatile than before, because grosser and freer from Water; and that the
Particles of Sal-armoniac in Sublimation carry up the Particles of
Antimony, which will not sublime alone; and that the Particles of
Mercury uniting with the acid Particles of Spirit of Salt compose
Mercury sublimate, and with the Particles of Sulphur, compose Cinnaber;
and that the Particles of Spirit of Wine and Spirit of Urine well
rectified unite, and letting go the Water which dissolved them, compose
a consistent Body; and that in subliming Cinnaber from Salt of Tartar,
or from quick Lime, the Sulphur by a stronger Attraction of the Salt or
Lime lets go the Mercury, and stays with the fix'd Body; and that when
Mercury sublimate is sublimed from Antimony, or from Regulus of
Antimony, the Spirit of Salt lets go the Mercury, and unites with the
antimonial metal which attracts it more strongly, and stays with it till
the Heat be great enough to make them both ascend together, and then
carries up the Metal with it in the form of a very fusible Salt, called
Butter of Antimony, although the Spirit of Salt alone be almost as
volatile as Water, and the Antimony alone as fix'd as Lead?

When _Aqua fortis_ dissolves Silver and not Gold, and _Aqua regia_
dissolves Gold and not Silver, may it not be said that _Aqua fortis_ is
subtil enough to penetrate Gold as well as Silver, but wants the
attractive Force to give it Entrance; and that _Aqua regia_ is subtil
enough to penetrate Silver as well as Gold, but wants the attractive
Force to give it Entrance? For _Aqua regia_ is nothing else than _Aqua
fortis_ mix'd with some Spirit of Salt, or with Sal-armoniac; and even
common Salt dissolved in _Aqua fortis_, enables the _Menstruum_ to
dissolve Gold, though the Salt be a gross Body. When therefore Spirit of
Salt precipitates Silver out of _Aqua fortis_, is it not done by
attracting and mixing with the _Aqua fortis_, and not attracting, or
perhaps repelling Silver? And when Water precipitates Antimony out of
the Sublimate of Antimony and Sal-armoniac, or out of Butter of
Antimony, is it not done by its dissolving, mixing with, and weakening
the Sal-armoniac or Spirit of Salt, and its not attracting, or perhaps
repelling the Antimony? And is it not for want of an attractive virtue
between the Parts of Water and Oil, of Quick-silver and Antimony, of
Lead and Iron, that these Substances do not mix; and by a weak
Attraction, that Quick-silver and Copper mix difficultly; and from a
strong one, that Quick-silver and Tin, Antimony and Iron, Water and
Salts, mix readily? And in general, is it not from the same Principle
that Heat congregates homogeneal Bodies, and separates heterogeneal
ones?

When Arsenick with Soap gives a Regulus, and with Mercury sublimate a
volatile fusible Salt, like Butter of Antimony, doth not this shew that
Arsenick, which is a Substance totally volatile, is compounded of fix'd
and volatile Parts, strongly cohering by a mutual Attraction, so that
the volatile will not ascend without carrying up the fixed? And so, when
an equal weight of Spirit of Wine and Oil of Vitriol are digested
together, and in Distillation yield two fragrant and volatile Spirits
which will not mix with one another, and a fix'd black Earth remains
behind; doth not this shew that Oil of Vitriol is composed of volatile
and fix'd Parts strongly united by Attraction, so as to ascend together
in form of a volatile, acid, fluid Salt, until the Spirit of Wine
attracts and separates the volatile Parts from the fixed? And therefore,
since Oil of Sulphur _per Campanam_ is of the same Nature with Oil of
Vitriol, may it not be inferred, that Sulphur is also a mixture of
volatile and fix'd Parts so strongly cohering by Attraction, as to
ascend together in Sublimation. By dissolving Flowers of Sulphur in Oil
of Turpentine, and distilling the Solution, it is found that Sulphur is
composed of an inflamable thick Oil or fat Bitumen, an acid Salt, a very
fix'd Earth, and a little Metal. The three first were found not much
unequal to one another, the fourth in so small a quantity as scarce to
be worth considering. The acid Salt dissolved in Water, is the same with
Oil of Sulphur _per Campanam_, and abounding much in the Bowels of the
Earth, and particularly in Markasites, unites it self to the other
Ingredients of the Markasite, which are, Bitumen, Iron, Copper, and
Earth, and with them compounds Allum, Vitriol, and Sulphur. With the
Earth alone it compounds Allum; with the Metal alone, or Metal and
Earth together, it compounds Vitriol; and with the Bitumen and Earth it
compounds Sulphur. Whence it comes to pass that Markasites abound with
those three Minerals. And is it not from the mutual Attraction of the
Ingredients that they stick together for compounding these Minerals, and
that the Bitumen carries up the other Ingredients of the Sulphur, which
without it would not sublime? And the same Question may be put
concerning all, or almost all the gross Bodies in Nature. For all the
Parts of Animals and Vegetables are composed of Substances volatile and
fix'd, fluid and solid, as appears by their Analysis; and so are Salts
and Minerals, so far as Chymists have been hitherto able to examine
their Composition.

When Mercury sublimate is re-sublimed with fresh Mercury, and becomes
_Mercurius Dulcis_, which is a white tasteless Earth scarce dissolvable
in Water, and _Mercurius Dulcis_ re-sublimed with Spirit of Salt returns
into Mercury sublimate; and when Metals corroded with a little acid turn
into rust, which is an Earth tasteless and indissolvable in Water, and
this Earth imbibed with more acid becomes a metallick Salt; and when
some Stones, as Spar of Lead, dissolved in proper _Menstruums_ become
Salts; do not these things shew that Salts are dry Earth and watry Acid
united by Attraction, and that the Earth will not become a Salt without
so much acid as makes it dissolvable in Water? Do not the sharp and
pungent Tastes of Acids arise from the strong Attraction whereby the
acid Particles rush upon and agitate the Particles of the Tongue? And
when Metals are dissolved in acid _Menstruums_, and the Acids in
conjunction with the Metal act after a different manner, so that the
Compound has a different Taste much milder than before, and sometimes a
sweet one; is it not because the Acids adhere to the metallick
Particles, and thereby lose much of their Activity? And if the Acid be
in too small a Proportion to make the Compound dissolvable in Water,
will it not by adhering strongly to the Metal become unactive and lose
its Taste, and the Compound be a tasteless Earth? For such things as are
not dissolvable by the Moisture of the Tongue, act not upon the Taste.

As Gravity makes the Sea flow round the denser and weightier Parts of
the Globe of the Earth, so the Attraction may make the watry Acid flow
round the denser and compacter Particles of Earth for composing the
Particles of Salt. For otherwise the Acid would not do the Office of a
Medium between the Earth and common Water, for making Salts dissolvable
in the Water; nor would Salt of Tartar readily draw off the Acid from
dissolved Metals, nor Metals the Acid from Mercury. Now, as in the great
Globe of the Earth and Sea, the densest Bodies by their Gravity sink
down in Water, and always endeavour to go towards the Center of the
Globe; so in Particles of Salt, the densest Matter may always endeavour
to approach the Center of the Particle: So that a Particle of Salt may
be compared to a Chaos; being dense, hard, dry, and earthy in the
Center; and rare, soft, moist, and watry in the Circumference. And
hence it seems to be that Salts are of a lasting Nature, being scarce
destroy'd, unless by drawing away their watry Parts by violence, or by
letting them soak into the Pores of the central Earth by a gentle Heat
in Putrefaction, until the Earth be dissolved by the Water, and
separated into smaller Particles, which by reason of their Smallness
make the rotten Compound appear of a black Colour. Hence also it may be,
that the Parts of Animals and Vegetables preserve their several Forms,
and assimilate their Nourishment; the soft and moist Nourishment easily
changing its Texture by a gentle Heat and Motion, till it becomes like
the dense, hard, dry, and durable Earth in the Center of each Particle.
But when the Nourishment grows unfit to be assimilated, or the central
Earth grows too feeble to assimilate it, the Motion ends in Confusion,
Putrefaction, and Death.

If a very small quantity of any Salt or Vitriol be dissolved in a great
quantity of Water, the Particles of the Salt or Vitriol will not sink to
the bottom, though they be heavier in Specie than the Water, but will
evenly diffuse themselves into all the Water, so as to make it as saline
at the top as at the bottom. And does not this imply that the Parts of
the Salt or Vitriol recede from one another, and endeavour to expand
themselves, and get as far asunder as the quantity of Water in which
they float, will allow? And does not this Endeavour imply that they have
a repulsive Force by which they fly from one another, or at least, that
they attract the Water more strongly than they do one another? For as
all things ascend in Water which are less attracted than Water, by the
gravitating Power of the Earth; so all the Particles of Salt which float
in Water, and are less attracted than Water by any one Particle of Salt,
must recede from that Particle, and give way to the more attracted
Water.

When any saline Liquor is evaporated to a Cuticle and let cool, the Salt
concretes in regular Figures; which argues, that the Particles of the
Salt before they concreted, floated in the Liquor at equal distances in
rank and file, and by consequence that they acted upon one another by
some Power which at equal distances is equal, at unequal distances
unequal. For by such a Power they will range themselves uniformly, and
without it they will float irregularly, and come together as
irregularly. And since the Particles of Island-Crystal act all the same
way upon the Rays of Light for causing the unusual Refraction, may it
not be supposed that in the Formation of this Crystal, the Particles not
only ranged themselves in rank and file for concreting in regular
Figures, but also by some kind of polar Virtue turned their homogeneal
Sides the same way.

The Parts of all homogeneal hard Bodies which fully touch one another,
stick together very strongly. And for explaining how this may be, some
have invented hooked Atoms, which is begging the Question; and others
tell us that Bodies are glued together by rest, that is, by an occult
Quality, or rather by nothing; and others, that they stick together by
conspiring Motions, that is, by relative rest amongst themselves. I had
rather infer from their Cohesion, that their Particles attract one
another by some Force, which in immediate Contact is exceeding strong,
at small distances performs the chymical Operations above-mention'd, and
reaches not far from the Particles with any sensible Effect.

All Bodies seem to be composed of hard Particles: For otherwise Fluids
would not congeal; as Water, Oils, Vinegar, and Spirit or Oil of Vitriol
do by freezing; Mercury by Fumes of Lead; Spirit of Nitre and Mercury,
by dissolving the Mercury and evaporating the Flegm; Spirit of Wine and
Spirit of Urine, by deflegming and mixing them; and Spirit of Urine and
Spirit of Salt, by subliming them together to make Sal-armoniac. Even
the Rays of Light seem to be hard Bodies; for otherwise they would not
retain different Properties in their different Sides. And therefore
Hardness may be reckon'd the Property of all uncompounded Matter. At
least, this seems to be as evident as the universal Impenetrability of
Matter. For all Bodies, so far as Experience reaches, are either hard,
or may be harden'd; and we have no other Evidence of universal
Impenetrability, besides a large Experience without an experimental
Exception. Now if compound Bodies are so very hard as we find some of
them to be, and yet are very porous, and consist of Parts which are only
laid together; the simple Particles which are void of Pores, and were
never yet divided, must be much harder. For such hard Particles being
heaped up together, can scarce touch one another in more than a few
Points, and therefore must be separable by much less Force than is
requisite to break a solid Particle, whose Parts touch in all the Space
between them, without any Pores or Interstices to weaken their Cohesion.
And how such very hard Particles which are only laid together and touch
only in a few Points, can stick together, and that so firmly as they do,
without the assistance of something which causes them to be attracted or
press'd towards one another, is very difficult to conceive.

The same thing I infer also from the cohering of two polish'd Marbles
_in vacuo_, and from the standing of Quick-silver in the Barometer at
the height of 50, 60 or 70 Inches, or above, when ever it is well-purged
of Air and carefully poured in, so that its Parts be every where
contiguous both to one another and to the Glass. The Atmosphere by its
weight presses the Quick-silver into the Glass, to the height of 29 or
30 Inches. And some other Agent raises it higher, not by pressing it
into the Glass, but by making its Parts stick to the Glass, and to one
another. For upon any discontinuation of Parts, made either by Bubbles
or by shaking the Glass, the whole Mercury falls down to the height of
29 or 30 Inches.

And of the same kind with these Experiments are those that follow. If
two plane polish'd Plates of Glass (suppose two pieces of a polish'd
Looking-glass) be laid together, so that their sides be parallel and at
a very small distance from one another, and then their lower edges be
dipped into Water, the Water will rise up between them. And the less
the distance of the Glasses is, the greater will be the height to which
the Water will rise. If the distance be about the hundredth part of an
Inch, the Water will rise to the height of about an Inch; and if the
distance be greater or less in any Proportion, the height will be
reciprocally proportional to the distance very nearly. For the
attractive Force of the Glasses is the same, whether the distance
between them be greater or less; and the weight of the Water drawn up is
the same, if the height of it be reciprocally proportional to the
distance of the Glasses. And in like manner, Water ascends between two
Marbles polish'd plane, when their polish'd sides are parallel, and at a
very little distance from one another, And if slender Pipes of Glass be
dipped at one end into stagnating Water, the Water will rise up within
the Pipe, and the height to which it rises will be reciprocally
proportional to the Diameter of the Cavity of the Pipe, and will equal
the height to which it rises between two Planes of Glass, if the
Semi-diameter of the Cavity of the Pipe be equal to the distance between
the Planes, or thereabouts. And these Experiments succeed after the same
manner _in vacuo_ as in the open Air, (as hath been tried before the
Royal Society,) and therefore are not influenced by the Weight or
Pressure of the Atmosphere.

And if a large Pipe of Glass be filled with sifted Ashes well pressed
together in the Glass, and one end of the Pipe be dipped into stagnating
Water, the Water will rise up slowly in the Ashes, so as in the space
of a Week or Fortnight to reach up within the Glass, to the height of 30
or 40 Inches above the stagnating Water. And the Water rises up to this
height by the Action only of those Particles of the Ashes which are upon
the Surface of the elevated Water; the Particles which are within the
Water, attracting or repelling it as much downwards as upwards. And
therefore the Action of the Particles is very strong. But the Particles
of the Ashes being not so dense and close together as those of Glass,
their Action is not so strong as that of Glass, which keeps Quick-silver
suspended to the height of 60 or 70 Inches, and therefore acts with a
Force which would keep Water suspended to the height of above 60 Feet.

By the same Principle, a Sponge sucks in Water, and the Glands in the
Bodies of Animals, according to their several Natures and Dispositions,
suck in various Juices from the Blood.

If two plane polish'd Plates of Glass three or four Inches broad, and
twenty or twenty five long, be laid one of them parallel to the Horizon,
the other upon the first, so as at one of their ends to touch one
another, and contain an Angle of about 10 or 15 Minutes, and the same be
first moisten'd on their inward sides with a clean Cloth dipp'd into Oil
of Oranges or Spirit of Turpentine, and a Drop or two of the Oil or
Spirit be let fall upon the lower Glass at the other; so soon as the
upper Glass is laid down upon the lower, so as to touch it at one end as
above, and to touch the Drop at the other end, making with the lower
Glass an Angle of about 10 or 15 Minutes; the Drop will begin to move
towards the Concourse of the Glasses, and will continue to move with an
accelerated Motion, till it arrives at that Concourse of the Glasses.
For the two Glasses attract the Drop, and make it run that way towards
which the Attractions incline. And if when the Drop is in motion you
lift up that end of the Glasses where they meet, and towards which the
Drop moves, the Drop will ascend between the Glasses, and therefore is
attracted. And as you lift up the Glasses more and more, the Drop will
ascend slower and slower, and at length rest, being then carried
downward by its Weight, as much as upwards by the Attraction. And by
this means you may know the Force by which the Drop is attracted at all
distances from the Concourse of the Glasses.

Now by some Experiments of this kind, (made by Mr. _Hauksbee_) it has
been found that the Attraction is almost reciprocally in a duplicate
Proportion of the distance of the middle of the Drop from the Concourse
of the Glasses, _viz._ reciprocally in a simple Proportion, by reason of
the spreading of the Drop, and its touching each Glass in a larger
Surface; and again reciprocally in a simple Proportion, by reason of the
Attractions growing stronger within the same quantity of attracting
Surface. The Attraction therefore within the same quantity of attracting
Surface, is reciprocally as the distance between the Glasses. And
therefore where the distance is exceeding small, the Attraction must be
exceeding great. By the Table in the second Part of the second Book,
wherein the thicknesses of colour'd Plates of Water between two Glasses
are set down, the thickness of the Plate where it appears very black, is
three eighths of the ten hundred thousandth part of an Inch. And where
the Oil of Oranges between the Glasses is of this thickness, the
Attraction collected by the foregoing Rule, seems to be so strong, as
within a Circle of an Inch in diameter, to suffice to hold up a Weight
equal to that of a Cylinder of Water of an Inch in diameter, and two or
three Furlongs in length. And where it is of a less thickness the
Attraction may be proportionally greater, and continue to increase,
until the thickness do not exceed that of a single Particle of the Oil.
There are therefore Agents in Nature able to make the Particles of
Bodies stick together by very strong Attractions. And it is the Business
of experimental Philosophy to find them out.

Now the smallest Particles of Matter may cohere by the strongest
Attractions, and compose bigger Particles of weaker Virtue; and many of
these may cohere and compose bigger Particles whose Virtue is still
weaker, and so on for divers Successions, until the Progression end in
the biggest Particles on which the Operations in Chymistry, and the
Colours of natural Bodies depend, and which by cohering compose Bodies
of a sensible Magnitude. If the Body is compact, and bends or yields
inward to Pression without any sliding of its Parts, it is hard and
elastick, returning to its Figure with a Force rising from the mutual
Attraction of its Parts. If the Parts slide upon one another, the Body
is malleable or soft. If they slip easily, and are of a fit Size to be
agitated by Heat, and the Heat is big enough to keep them in Agitation,
the Body is fluid; and if it be apt to stick to things, it is humid; and
the Drops of every fluid affect a round Figure by the mutual Attraction
of their Parts, as the Globe of the Earth and Sea affects a round Figure
by the mutual Attraction of its Parts by Gravity.

Since Metals dissolved in Acids attract but a small quantity of the
Acid, their attractive Force can reach but to a small distance from
them. And as in Algebra, where affirmative Quantities vanish and cease,
there negative ones begin; so in Mechanicks, where Attraction ceases,
there a repulsive Virtue ought to succeed. And that there is such a
Virtue, seems to follow from the Reflexions and Inflexions of the Rays
of Light. For the Rays are repelled by Bodies in both these Cases,
without the immediate Contact of the reflecting or inflecting Body. It
seems also to follow from the Emission of Light; the Ray so soon as it
is shaken off from a shining Body by the vibrating Motion of the Parts
of the Body, and gets beyond the reach of Attraction, being driven away
with exceeding great Velocity. For that Force which is sufficient to
turn it back in Reflexion, may be sufficient to emit it. It seems also
to follow from the Production of Air and Vapour. The Particles when they
are shaken off from Bodies by Heat or Fermentation, so soon as they are
beyond the reach of the Attraction of the Body, receding from it, and
also from one another with great Strength, and keeping at a distance,
so as sometimes to take up above a Million of Times more space than they
did before in the form of a dense Body. Which vast Contraction and
Expansion seems unintelligible, by feigning the Particles of Air to be
springy and ramous, or rolled up like Hoops, or by any other means than
a repulsive Power. The Particles of Fluids which do not cohere too
strongly, and are of such a Smallness as renders them most susceptible
of those Agitations which keep Liquors in a Fluor, are most easily
separated and rarified into Vapour, and in the Language of the Chymists,
they are volatile, rarifying with an easy Heat, and condensing with
Cold. But those which are grosser, and so less susceptible of Agitation,
or cohere by a stronger Attraction, are not separated without a stronger
Heat, or perhaps not without Fermentation. And these last are the Bodies
which Chymists call fix'd, and being rarified by Fermentation, become
true permanent Air; those Particles receding from one another with the
greatest Force, and being most difficultly brought together, which upon
Contact cohere most strongly. And because the Particles of permanent Air
are grosser, and arise from denser Substances than those of Vapours,
thence it is that true Air is more ponderous than Vapour, and that a
moist Atmosphere is lighter than a dry one, quantity for quantity. From
the same repelling Power it seems to be that Flies walk upon the Water
without wetting their Feet; and that the Object-glasses of long
Telescopes lie upon one another without touching; and that dry Powders
are difficultly made to touch one another so as to stick together,
unless by melting them, or wetting them with Water, which by exhaling
may bring them together; and that two polish'd Marbles, which by
immediate Contact stick together, are difficultly brought so close
together as to stick.

And thus Nature will be very conformable to her self and very simple,
performing all the great Motions of the heavenly Bodies by the
Attraction of Gravity which intercedes those Bodies, and almost all the
small ones of their Particles by some other attractive and repelling
Powers which intercede the Particles. The _Vis inertiæ_ is a passive
Principle by which Bodies persist in their Motion or Rest, receive
Motion in proportion to the Force impressing it, and resist as much as
they are resisted. By this Principle alone there never could have been
any Motion in the World. Some other Principle was necessary for putting
Bodies into Motion; and now they are in Motion, some other Principle is
necessary for conserving the Motion. For from the various Composition of
two Motions, 'tis very certain that there is not always the same
quantity of Motion in the World. For if two Globes joined by a slender
Rod, revolve about their common Center of Gravity with an uniform
Motion, while that Center moves on uniformly in a right Line drawn in
the Plane of their circular Motion; the Sum of the Motions of the two
Globes, as often as the Globes are in the right Line described by their
common Center of Gravity, will be bigger than the Sum of their Motions,
when they are in a Line perpendicular to that right Line. By this
Instance it appears that Motion may be got or lost. But by reason of the
Tenacity of Fluids, and Attrition of their Parts, and the Weakness of
Elasticity in Solids, Motion is much more apt to be lost than got, and
is always upon the Decay. For Bodies which are either absolutely hard,
or so soft as to be void of Elasticity, will not rebound from one
another. Impenetrability makes them only stop. If two equal Bodies meet
directly _in vacuo_, they will by the Laws of Motion stop where they
meet, and lose all their Motion, and remain in rest, unless they be
elastick, and receive new Motion from their Spring. If they have so much
Elasticity as suffices to make them re-bound with a quarter, or half, or
three quarters of the Force with which they come together, they will
lose three quarters, or half, or a quarter of their Motion. And this may
be try'd, by letting two equal Pendulums fall against one another from
equal heights. If the Pendulums be of Lead or soft Clay, they will lose
all or almost all their Motions: If of elastick Bodies they will lose
all but what they recover from their Elasticity. If it be said, that
they can lose no Motion but what they communicate to other Bodies, the
consequence is, that _in vacuo_ they can lose no Motion, but when they
meet they must go on and penetrate one another's Dimensions. If three
equal round Vessels be filled, the one with Water, the other with Oil,
the third with molten Pitch, and the Liquors be stirred about alike to
give them a vortical Motion; the Pitch by its Tenacity will lose its
Motion quickly, the Oil being less tenacious will keep it longer, and
the Water being less tenacious will keep it longest, but yet will lose
it in a short time. Whence it is easy to understand, that if many
contiguous Vortices of molten Pitch were each of them as large as those
which some suppose to revolve about the Sun and fix'd Stars, yet these
and all their Parts would, by their Tenacity and Stiffness, communicate
their Motion to one another till they all rested among themselves.
Vortices of Oil or Water, or some fluider Matter, might continue longer
in Motion; but unless the Matter were void of all Tenacity and Attrition
of Parts, and Communication of Motion, (which is not to be supposed,)
the Motion would constantly decay. Seeing therefore the variety of
Motion which we find in the World is always decreasing, there is a
necessity of conserving and recruiting it by active Principles, such as
are the cause of Gravity, by which Planets and Comets keep their Motions
in their Orbs, and Bodies acquire great Motion in falling; and the cause
of Fermentation, by which the Heart and Blood of Animals are kept in
perpetual Motion and Heat; the inward Parts of the Earth are constantly
warm'd, and in some places grow very hot; Bodies burn and shine,
Mountains take fire, the Caverns of the Earth are blown up, and the Sun
continues violently hot and lucid, and warms all things by his Light.
For we meet with very little Motion in the World, besides what is owing
to these active Principles. And if it were not for these Principles, the
Bodies of the Earth, Planets, Comets, Sun, and all things in them,
would grow cold and freeze, and become inactive Masses; and all
Putrefaction, Generation, Vegetation and Life would cease, and the
Planets and Comets would not remain in their Orbs.

All these things being consider'd, it seems probable to me, that God in
the Beginning form'd Matter in solid, massy, hard, impenetrable,
moveable Particles, of such Sizes and Figures, and with such other
Properties, and in such Proportion to Space, as most conduced to the End
for which he form'd them; and that these primitive Particles being
Solids, are incomparably harder than any porous Bodies compounded of
them; even so very hard, as never to wear or break in pieces; no
ordinary Power being able to divide what God himself made one in the
first Creation. While the Particles continue entire, they may compose
Bodies of one and the same Nature and Texture in all Ages: But should
they wear away, or break in pieces, the Nature of Things depending on
them, would be changed. Water and Earth, composed of old worn Particles
and Fragments of Particles, would not be of the same Nature and Texture
now, with Water and Earth composed of entire Particles in the Beginning.
And therefore, that Nature may be lasting, the Changes of corporeal
Things are to be placed only in the various Separations and new
Associations and Motions of these permanent Particles; compound Bodies
being apt to break, not in the midst of solid Particles, but where those
Particles are laid together, and only touch in a few Points.

It seems to me farther, that these Particles have not only a _Vis
inertiæ_, accompanied with such passive Laws of Motion as naturally
result from that Force, but also that they are moved by certain active
Principles, such as is that of Gravity, and that which causes
Fermentation, and the Cohesion of Bodies. These Principles I consider,
not as occult Qualities, supposed to result from the specifick Forms of
Things, but as general Laws of Nature, by which the Things themselves
are form'd; their Truth appearing to us by Phænomena, though their
Causes be not yet discover'd. For these are manifest Qualities, and
their Causes only are occult. And the _Aristotelians_ gave the Name of
occult Qualities, not to manifest Qualities, but to such Qualities only
as they supposed to lie hid in Bodies, and to be the unknown Causes of
manifest Effects: Such as would be the Causes of Gravity, and of
magnetick and electrick Attractions, and of Fermentations, if we should
suppose that these Forces or Actions arose from Qualities unknown to us,
and uncapable of being discovered and made manifest. Such occult
Qualities put a stop to the Improvement of natural Philosophy, and
therefore of late Years have been rejected. To tell us that every
Species of Things is endow'd with an occult specifick Quality by which
it acts and produces manifest Effects, is to tell us nothing: But to
derive two or three general Principles of Motion from Phænomena, and
afterwards to tell us how the Properties and Actions of all corporeal
Things follow from those manifest Principles, would be a very great step
in Philosophy, though the Causes of those Principles were not yet
discover'd: And therefore I scruple not to propose the Principles of
Motion above-mention'd, they being of very general Extent, and leave
their Causes to be found out.

Now by the help of these Principles, all material Things seem to have
been composed of the hard and solid Particles above-mention'd, variously
associated in the first Creation by the Counsel of an intelligent Agent.
For it became him who created them to set them in order. And if he did
so, it's unphilosophical to seek for any other Origin of the World, or
to pretend that it might arise out of a Chaos by the mere Laws of
Nature; though being once form'd, it may continue by those Laws for many
Ages. For while Comets move in very excentrick Orbs in all manner of
Positions, blind Fate could never make all the Planets move one and the
same way in Orbs concentrick, some inconsiderable Irregularities
excepted, which may have risen from the mutual Actions of Comets and
Planets upon one another, and which will be apt to increase, till this
System wants a Reformation. Such a wonderful Uniformity in the Planetary
System must be allowed the Effect of Choice. And so must the Uniformity
in the Bodies of Animals, they having generally a right and a left side
shaped alike, and on either side of their Bodies two Legs behind, and
either two Arms, or two Legs, or two Wings before upon their Shoulders,
and between their Shoulders a Neck running down into a Back-bone, and a
Head upon it; and in the Head two Ears, two Eyes, a Nose, a Mouth, and
a Tongue, alike situated. Also the first Contrivance of those very
artificial Parts of Animals, the Eyes, Ears, Brain, Muscles, Heart,
Lungs, Midriff, Glands, Larynx, Hands, Wings, swimming Bladders, natural
Spectacles, and other Organs of Sense and Motion; and the Instinct of
Brutes and Insects, can be the effect of nothing else than the Wisdom
and Skill of a powerful ever-living Agent, who being in all Places, is
more able by his Will to move the Bodies within his boundless uniform
Sensorium, and thereby to form and reform the Parts of the Universe,
than we are by our Will to move the Parts of our own Bodies. And yet we
are not to consider the World as the Body of God, or the several Parts
thereof, as the Parts of God. He is an uniform Being, void of Organs,
Members or Parts, and they are his Creatures subordinate to him, and
subservient to his Will; and he is no more the Soul of them, than the
Soul of Man is the Soul of the Species of Things carried through the
Organs of Sense into the place of its Sensation, where it perceives them
by means of its immediate Presence, without the Intervention of any
third thing. The Organs of Sense are not for enabling the Soul to
perceive the Species of Things in its Sensorium, but only for conveying
them thither; and God has no need of such Organs, he being every where
present to the Things themselves. And since Space is divisible _in
infinitum_, and Matter is not necessarily in all places, it may be also
allow'd that God is able to create Particles of Matter of several Sizes
and Figures, and in several Proportions to Space, and perhaps of
different Densities and Forces, and thereby to vary the Laws of Nature,
and make Worlds of several sorts in several Parts of the Universe. At
least, I see nothing of Contradiction in all this.

As in Mathematicks, so in Natural Philosophy, the Investigation of
difficult Things by the Method of Analysis, ought ever to precede the
Method of Composition. This Analysis consists in making Experiments and
Observations, and in drawing general Conclusions from them by Induction,
and admitting of no Objections against the Conclusions, but such as are
taken from Experiments, or other certain Truths. For Hypotheses are not
to be regarded in experimental Philosophy. And although the arguing from
Experiments and Observations by Induction be no Demonstration of general
Conclusions; yet it is the best way of arguing which the Nature of
Things admits of, and may be looked upon as so much the stronger, by how
much the Induction is more general. And if no Exception occur from
Phænomena, the Conclusion may be pronounced generally. But if at any
time afterwards any Exception shall occur from Experiments, it may then
begin to be pronounced with such Exceptions as occur. By this way of
Analysis we may proceed from Compounds to Ingredients, and from Motions
to the Forces producing them; and in general, from Effects to their
Causes, and from particular Causes to more general ones, till the
Argument end in the most general. This is the Method of Analysis: And
the Synthesis consists in assuming the Causes discover'd, and
establish'd as Principles, and by them explaining the Phænomena
proceeding from them, and proving the Explanations.

In the two first Books of these Opticks, I proceeded by this Analysis to
discover and prove the original Differences of the Rays of Light in
respect of Refrangibility, Reflexibility, and Colour, and their
alternate Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission, and the
Properties of Bodies, both opake and pellucid, on which their Reflexions
and Colours depend. And these Discoveries being proved, may be assumed
in the Method of Composition for explaining the Phænomena arising from
them: An Instance of which Method I gave in the End of the first Book.
In this third Book I have only begun the Analysis of what remains to be
discover'd about Light and its Effects upon the Frame of Nature, hinting
several things about it, and leaving the Hints to be examin'd and
improv'd by the farther Experiments and Observations of such as are
inquisitive. And if natural Philosophy in all its Parts, by pursuing
this Method, shall at length be perfected, the Bounds of Moral
Philosophy will be also enlarged. For so far as we can know by natural
Philosophy what is the first Cause, what Power he has over us, and what
Benefits we receive from him, so far our Duty towards him, as well as
that towards one another, will appear to us by the Light of Nature. And
no doubt, if the Worship of false Gods had not blinded the Heathen,
their moral Philosophy would have gone farther than to the four
Cardinal Virtues; and instead of teaching the Transmigration of Souls,
and to worship the Sun and Moon, and dead Heroes, they would have taught
us to worship our true Author and Benefactor, as their Ancestors did
under the Government of _Noah_ and his Sons before they corrupted
themselves.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Opticks, by Isaac Newton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OPTICKS ***

***** This file should be named 33504-8.txt or 33504-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/5/0/33504/

Produced by Suzanne Lybarger, steve harris, Josephine
Paolucci and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
